copyright! {U} utility et "securityr centerences" E {hide-3

2012.02.00 - 09:53 am
Do not reuse

this image!

            

IILJHFDLJDII Caveat: it's been a ceuple years since I have attended a security
cenferenceIIShmeecenIDefceniEtlaclchatl. My epiniens are net fermed frem recent ﬁrst-hand
experience. but threugh previeus stimuli te my cerebrum that have been cenﬁrmed by 2nd hand
experience ever the last ceuple ef years. When I ﬁrst went te Eilaclthati'Defcen. it was with the
wide-eyed anticipatien ef. "I'm geing te ge listen te all ef the tallcs that I can. sealc up all ef the
infermatien pessible. and beceme a supar—lEEF-haxxer." What a let-dewn ef an experience that
was. ‘ibu ﬁnd the mest interesting tepics and brieﬁngs. wait in lines te get a seat. and ﬁnd
yeurself straining yeur ears te listen te semeene that has basically nething new te say Mest ef
the tallcs get hyped up expenentially past any ameunt ef substance they actually previde. mest ef
the "interactive sessiens" end up in a "eh! wee is the state ef the security industry!" chant. and
leave the audience ne better effthan befere.

IILJHFDLJDII |f yeu want te learn crazy new things. mere eften than net. yeu wen't ﬁnd it at a tall: in a
cen. Why net wall-c: areund NBA. ﬁnd peeple in efﬁces that de things yeu ﬁnd interesting. and tall:
te them abeut hew they de what they deter ﬁnd a menter in that area)? Despite stereetypes ef
the Icinds ef peeple that werlc: here. many peeple are Isind and epen eneugh te share their
trade-craft with ethers. We have the luxury ef werlcing in a cemmunity that has seme ef the
brightest. smartest. and mest cutting edge peeple areund. it weuld be a shame fer peeple te
censtantly attend cens heping te learn that "ceel new thing". when there is expenentially mere
Icnewledge sitting areund them every single day at werl~c

IILJHFDLJDII Granted. there are always a ceuple exceptienal talks at the cens. but. in my humble
epinien. they den't malce up fer the everall lack; ef centent. Se. what geed are these cenferences?
My persenal epinien is that their utility is mainly fer secial interactien and meeting *relatively*
like-minded individuals. It's the abilityte Icicle back: fer a weekend and geek-eut with ether peeple.
Fer seme. this malces the cest ef the cen cempletely werth it. ethers may be severely
disappeinted...it all depends en what yeu expect te get eut ef it.

Current l'I-I'leed:.ek.ay

Leave a cemment

“"91"in {U} I hunt SIGIHTs (part 1} E {hide}

2012.12.12 - 10:10 am
[Is not reuse

this image!

 

{SISIHRELJ So. SIGINT is down right cool. As much as we complain about our "Eiig Data Problem".
oolleotionfprooessing issues. dismal infrastruotureifoutdated browsersIDS's. our ability to pull bits
out of random places of the Internet. bring them back: to the mother-base to evaluate and build
intelligenoe off of is just plain awesome!

{SISIHRELJ l[:Ine of the coolest things about it is how much data we have at our fingertips. If we
*only* collected the data we knew we wanted...yeah. we'd ﬁll some of our requirements. but this is
a whole world of possibilities we'd be missing! It would be like going on a road-trip. but wearing a
blindfold the entire time. and only removing it when you're at one of your destinations...yeah.
you'll still see stuff. but you'll be missing out on the entire journey!

{SISIHRELJ So I decided to write a short series {affectionately titled '.I' hunt ...']I on things that I'm
trying to do with data that wouldn't normally be interesting by itself. but by thinldng about it in a
new way. maltes it extremely valuable. My interests lately have been in using passive oolleot to
identifyfenable IENE efforts. so that's predominantly what the first few topics will be about.

IILJHFDLJDII Ifthere are any topios someone wants to see speoifioally. let me lcnow. As well. if any of
the following information is useful. please let me Intnow and I can put more out. Part 2 - Hunting
sys admins ooming very soon!

2 comments :: Leave a comment

 

WWW“! (U) I hunt sys admins (part 2} a 5 {hide}

2012.12.12 - 12:d2 pm
[In not reuse

_ _ Entryr tags: admin. cne. infrastructure. quantum. target
this Image!

 

IIUHFDUDII This post is meant to provide a background for *why* it's good to target sys ao'mihs iri
SiEi'N'T. if you already know this. feei free to ship forward to the next sections.

ESiSIHFtELII Being in SID. our overall goal is to produce intelligence to give to decision-makers. How
we go about doing that. is whenever a target uses technology to communicate. we collect it.
analyze it. and write reports on it. Sounds simple enough...except forthe fact that we have to be
targeted in what networks we collect. We can't collect everything all the time. so if a target starts
to communicate on a network: where we are not collecting. there is some manual leg-work: that
has to be done to steer the SIGINT system in their direction. This is where I must introduce my
loyal friend. the sys admin.

{SISIHRELJ Up front. sys admins generally are net my and target. My and target is the
extremistiterrorist or government ofﬁcial that happens to be using the network: some admin takes
care of. Sys admins are a means to an end. For example. assume your target is using a CDMA
device on a foreign networlc: there may be situations where we passively collect his phone
calliSMS out in the wild. but it would be *really* nice if we had access to the local infrastructure
where we could monitor which tower he's connected to at any given point in time. or monitor all
phone callsidata traffic that his phone generates. Many times. it's difficult to directly target
infrastructure..generally we'll need a fair amount of information going into an operation. such as:
* topology of the network; we are targeting

* credentials for infrastructure devices

* situational xnowledge. such as access lists set up to only allow speciﬁc IP addresses to
administer certain machines

* an overall lcnowledge of how the network: is put together and configured

{SISIHRELJ In order to get that. who better to target than the person that already has the 'lceys to
the lcingdom'? Many times. as soon as | see a target show up on a new networlc. one of my first
goals is. "Can we get CNE access to the admins on that network. in order to get access to the
infrastructure that target is using?"

"ir’eah. thatpretty much maices sense. but how are you 'iust gonna get ENE access' on an admin F'"

{SISIHRELJ Good question. thanlcs for aslcing. Most of the time I'm going to rely on QUANTUM to get
access to their account (yeah. you couio' try spam. but people have been getting smarter over
the last 5-1:!) years...it's not as reiiahie anymore}. So. in order to work: our QUANTUM-magic on an
admin. we'll need some sort of webmailifaceboolc selector for them.

"You icnolm you *couio't iust iooic: up the 'point of contact' in the registry information associated
with their i'F spacefciomaih names..."

{SISIHRELJ 'Tbah. you could do that. Personally. I haven't had a huge amount of luck; with it.
because most of the time lend up running across their *official* e-mail address that's hosted on
their own network. That's generally not a recipe for success in the QUANTUM world. what we'd
really lilce is a personal webmail or faceboolc account to target. There's a couple ways you could
try this: dumpster-dive for alternate selectors in the big SIGINT trash can. or pull out your wiclced
Google-fu to see if they've posted on any forums and list both their official and non-official e-mails
in a signature blocx...but what if there was another way to do it?

ESiSIHFtELII Either fun IIread:useful]I things to get off of a sys admin {from my point of view]:

* network: maps off of their hard drive

* credentials from text files for from our lcey-Ioggers...potato potato}

*full lists of customers IIalong with associated dedicated IF' allocations is a bonus]

* e-mail with upstream providers detailing how your network: is connected to the bigger Internetz.
For example. if I see they use certain fiber cables to connect to the world. I'll go loolc in ﬂ's
collect for their traffic. If they use ‘v'SAT's. I'll go look: for their network; in FDRNSAT's environment.

* pictures of cats in funny poses with amusing captions

ESiSIHFtELII But all of this boils down to getting an admin's webmailifaceboolc account in order to
QUANTUM it and get ENE access to their box. Next section will detail targeting admins who use
telnet...

3 comments :: Leave a comment

 

T'I'F' SE'I'FLET_-"_-"SI_-"_-"FLEL TO USE. F'UE‘L'

“"Wﬂﬂhﬂ (U) I hunt admins that uee telnet (part 3) a 5 {hide}

2012.12.12 - net: 09 pm
Do not reuse

“f _ I Entryr tags: access list. admin. cloud. cne. passive. quantum. sigint. telnet
I5 Ilﬂﬂﬂﬂ.

 

IISlSIllFtEL]| If a target that I care about is on a network that I don't have access to. in thi post I
described that I will try to get access to that network by targeting the sys admin. In order to
target the sys admin. it's easiest if I know what their personal webmaillfacebook username is so
that I can target it with QUANTUM. The hardest part is identifying that admin's personal account
to target in the ﬁrst place.

Now. fade off wlth me into dream—land. Pretend that we had some master llst. Thls master list
contained tons of networks around the world. and the personal accounts of admins for each of
those networks. And any time you wanted to target a new network. you could just ﬁnd the admin
associated with it. gueue hls accounts up for QUANTUM. get access to his box and proceed to pwn
the network. Wouldn't that be swell?

IISlSIllFtELl Well. you can stop dreaming my friends. I think it's possible [at least kinda partially}.
And we'll get started on this endeavor by chasing down admins that use telnet. Sythis point. I'm
hoping you're saying. "Telnet? Telnet?! No one should still be using telnet!" That is the correct
response. however. telnet las an administrative tool on the Internet} is alive and well. In fact. it's
so alive and well. DISCDRDUTE is a tool speciﬁcally designed to suck up and database router
conﬁguration ﬁles seen in passively collected telnet sessions [for the record. DISCDRDUTE is
awesome. and you should check it out if you have at least one iota of love for SISINTII. So. what
shall we do with all of these conﬁguration ﬁles?

"Elude.i Map all the networkslll"

IISlSIllREL]| tbs. that is deﬁnitely a useful thing to do with all of these router conﬁgs. and is
something that will need to be done. But understanding the topology of a network isn't
necessarily going to get us access to that network...per my previous post. I mentioned how
getting ENE access to an admin is usually a golden ticket into the network. So. this raises a
question:

"How can we use a router conﬁguration ﬁle to ﬁnd the personal webmaillfacebook
accounts of a sys admin?"

lSlSIllRELII To illustrate this point. I randomly picked a conﬁg for a router in kenya...the link is NF.
so send me an e-mail if you'd like to look at the conﬁg in it's entirety For now. I'll just copylpaste
the relevant portions. This process. as with any analysis at it's most fundamental level. is based
on assumptions. Here are probably some safe assumptions:

*We have a router. and that router has an admin

* Eiythe nature of having the conﬁg in DISCDRDUTE. the admin uses telnet to log into the router

* The admin probably doesn't want to let anyone and everyone else log into the router

* The admin may set up an access control list to only allow his IF addresses to telnet to the router

IITSlSIllFtEL]I Those seem like relatively safe assumptions to make for the moment. Now. let's see
how those manifest in our ettample kenyan conﬁg lif you're not familiar with router conﬁgs. don't
worry. this will be pretty basicl:

ll First. let's look at the vty |[read:telnet]| lines on the router. and see if there is an access list
associated with them:

 line vty E] S _ 
: access-class 11 in 

IITSlSIllFtEL]I 't'up. for all ofthe telnet lines. access list #11 is applied...which basically means. if you
want to telnet to this router. you have to meet the criteria of that access list. foh. before l forget.
password F's are HDFLeasy to crack. You can google 'clsco password 2 cracker' and get web
pages that allow you to copy the password I" hash. and it'll break it for free...anyone can ﬁgure
out the password for this router. And polntlng' out for the lulz. the enable password for this router
ls password I" hashed as well!)

21...anyway. on with the access list #11:

access-list 11 permit
access-list 11 permit
access-list 11 permit
access-list 11 permit
access-list 11 permit
access-list 11 permit
access-list 11 permit
access-list 11 permit
access-list 11 permit
access-list 11 permit
access-list 11 permit
access-list 11 permit
access-list 11 permit
access-list 11 permit
access-list 11 permit

 

IITSlSIllFtEL]I Okay. this is relatively self-evident. If you want to telnet into this router. you have to be
coming from one of those IF addresses that are permitted. Those who are slightly network-savvy
will also be quick to point out. that even if you know the credentials for this router. and know
which IF's are whitelisted. you CAN MDT just spoof the source IF of packets to try to log into this
router...blc you'd never see the responses. So you *actually* have to have access to one of these
IF's to log into this router. Fair enough? Mmkay

IITSlSIllFtEL]I I want to take a quick look back at our assumptions for a sec. We assumed that an
admin would allow himself to telnet. but not others. So. based on the combination of that
assumption with the info from the conﬁg. we can make the following assumption:

"The IP addresses in that access list probably belong to entities that administer that
Kenyan network."

ETSlSIllRELII Hopefully that sounds fair enough. Here's the fun part...why don't we take those IF
addresses. and lookfor *anyone* actively logging into their hotmaillyahoolfaceboolo'etc accounts
from those IF addresses within the recent past? With whatever results you get back. you now
have a probable list of personal accounts of administrators for that Kenyan network!
From here. if you need ISNE access to that network. just pull those selectors. gueue them up for
QUANTUM. and proceed with the pwnage. 't'ay! lthrows confetti in the air

"Dkay. that sounds relatlvely reasonable. but that's still a pretty manual process. . . "

ETSlSIllRELII 'tEah. you're correct...but here's where "the cloud" actually comes to the rescue
(yeah. I said it. crucify mell...All of the DISCDRDUTE data is dumped into the ISM Flace cloud. All
ASDF gets dumped into the ISM Place cloud IIASDF is the metadata that gets generated for almost
every session that we collect in our big bad passive SIISINT system}. So. all someone would have
to do is write a cloud analytic that would do the following:

-1]I parse through all of the router conﬁgs in DISCDRDUTE

----1a]I identify every router that has an access list tied to a vty [telnet]I line

----1b]| look through the access list. and pull out all public IF addresses

----1c]I put those public IF addresses in a list somewhere

-2]| parse through all the Active User events in ASDF

----2a]| take the list of public IF's that are associated with probable sys admins and use it as our
seed list

----2bl look for all Active User login activity from those IF addresses

----2c]I take all accounts that come back and put those into another list

IITSlSIllFtEL]I So. by combining all of that information. you end up with a list of public IF addresses
that probably belong to sys admins as well as personal accounts that probably belong to those
admins. All you have to do is put all this info in a database somewhere. and what you end up with
is a list of networks as well as personal accounts of probable admins for those networks! Then. as
soon as one of those networks becomes a target. all TAD has to do is query the database. see if
we have any admins pre-identiﬁed for that network. and if we do. automatically queue up tasking
and go-go-CNE!

ETSlSIllRELII All of this can be done by tweaking the data that we already have at our
ﬁngertips!!! Remember. our "Big Data Froblem" is that we have too much data...al| we have to
do is ﬁnd ways of taking disparate data sets that wouldn't necessarily be interesting by
themselves. but when you put them together in the right way become simply awesome!

"t’eah. okay. that's cool and all. but that relles on sys admins belngr bad and uslngr telnet. *l* don't
use telnet and most people that l know don't use telnet. it would never be able to ldentlfy usl"

IITSlSIllFtEL]I Good point. this analytic does rely on admins using telnet. HOWEVER. I have an idea
for how to identify personal accounts of admins that use SSH as well. which I'll talk about in my
nettt post ll hunt admins that use SSHII!

Current Mood:scheming

It“ comments :: Leave a comment

T-I-F' 'IEII' F'ET.-'  'II   F'EL TO USE. F"-'E'I'

WWW“! {U} I hunt admins that use SSH {part a!) a 5 (hide!

2012.12.13 - l]2:¢11 pm
Do not reuse

_ _ Entryr tags: cne. quantum. router. server. ssh
tlns Imago!

 

IISHSIHREL] Welcome back comrade! It's good to see you again. For background. I talked in thi
post about why I target system administrators when Iwant ENE access to a network. and I talked
in this other post about how we can get sys admin's personal selectors {for targeting] based on
router configs that we passively collect through telnet sessions. This begs the obvious retort:

" Yeah. .but that wouldn't work at aI'I' against any sys admin that uses SSH. because we would never
see the content of the conﬁgi i't's encrypted!"

IISHSIHF‘IEL] That is absolutely correct. however. Options Exist! I still think it's possible to identify a
sys admin's personal account isometimes] even if they use SSH. First off. if you're at all unfamiliar
with SSH. please feel free to check out the resource graciously posted by one of my favorite

high-side online personas._ located here.

IISHSIHFtEL] Before we get into the methodology. let's talk about SSH for a minute. and some
assumptions that we're going to make [up front caveat: I'm assuming we're looking for SSH on
port 22. I'm sure there's ways to find it on non-standard ports. but just for the sake of clarity. I'll
refer to SSH sessions as defined by being on port 22]. Let's assume that you try to use SSH to
connect to some server:

IIUHFDUD] Assuming 1.2.3.4 actually has SSH listening on port 22. it'll go through the 3-way TCF'
handshake. and the server will send you back some packets and something like this may pop up:

Warning! This is a banner for some router owned by some company,
if you're not authorized to log in to this device, disconnect immediately!

Stab. . .blah. . .btah. ..

Enter username:

IIUHFDUD] Here's where you enter your username...we'll pretend you type 'admin' and press
Enter. Then you get this:

IIUHFDUD] |Iitikay. here's where the rubber meets the road. lSine of two options exist. Either you
have the right password. or you don't. Let's explore what would happen under each of the
circumstances. First off. let's pretend you do MDT have the right password. 'r'ou try 'admin' for the
password and press enter:

 Invalid password. Enter password: 

IIUHFDUD] If you're password guessing. you'll probably get about 3 tries before the server kills the
connection. and you have to reconnect and try again. However. if you do have the right
password. you'll log in. you can run your commands to do whatever you want to do. and the server
will spit back the output for all of the commands that you run.

IITSHSIHF‘IEL] I know. that sounds uber—simple. but here's why it matters. Think about what all of
this would look like if we were to observe this in our passive SISINT system. We would probably see
encrypted traffic between two IFs. one ofthe ports would be on port 22 IIwe'll saythat's the server
side]. The traffic going TD PDHT 22 [in the client-to-server direction] will consist of sending a
username. sending a password. and sending commands (assuming the client successfully logged
in]. Fortraffic coming FRDI'H'I PDHT 22. well...that depends.

IISHSIHREL] If the client does not have the right credentials. we'd expect the server-to-client
direction to consist of:

1] sending the device's banner

2] sending the prompt for a username

S] sending the prompt for a password

=1] sending another prompt for a password

S] sending ANDTHEFt prompt for a password

S] subsequently giving up. killing the connection. and forcing the client to restart and try again

IISHSIHREL] If the client does have the right credentials. we might expect the server-to-client
direction to consist of:

1] sending the device's banner

2] sending the prompt for a username

S] sending the prompt for a password

4 thru ?] sending back the output for whatever commands the client runs

IISHSIHFtEL] So. purely based off ofthe above assessment. we would expect unsuccessful logins
to be consistently small [as in. the number of bytes] in the server-to-client direction. However.
successful logins will be of variable length. but probably consistently larger in size [in bytes]
when compared to unsuccessful logins. So. one assumption that I am suggesting is:

“fou can guesstimate whether an SSH session was successful or not *PUHELW based
off of the size of the session in the server-to-client direction.

IISHSIHFtEL] So. imagine that you do some analysis. and determine that lSDU bytes is roughly a
good number to differentiate between successfuliunsuccessful SSH login attempts. Any server-
to-client SSH session below that size is probably an unsuccessful attempt. and any server-
to-client SSH session over that size is probably a successful attempt. What could you do. armed
with information like that?

1] 'r'bu could create lists of client IP addresses that consistently are unsuccessful in SSH
sessions to multiple servers. Then you could put these in a. "probably password
guessersiprobably brute forcers" list.

2] 'r'bu could also create lists of IP addresses that appear to be successful in having access to
other IPs. fahhhh yeah. here's where we can have fun]

IISHSIHFtEL] I'm sure there are a plethora of other things you can do with that sort of data. but I'm
really interested in #2 at the moment. Eiased purely off of:

* FRDM port 22

* session size is greaterthan 1500 bytes

then I can inferthat:

* To IF' = admin
* From IF = servedrouter
*The admin appears to have successful access to the server

"Aaaaand?"

IITSHSIHF‘IEL] From here. all I have to do is recycle my methodology from last post! I can scour ALL
DF SIGINT for sessions that meet the above criteria. harvest a list of "admin IPs". use that as a
seed list to go back through all ASDF looking for any Active User login events within a time frame
ofthe SSH session. and now I have personal accounts for people that are probably admins to the
server IF. So if the server IP is ever in a network that I want access to. I don't have to decrypt the
admin's SSH session. all I have to do is hope be checked his facebookiwebmail within a certain
timeframe of SSH'ing to the server. If he did. that selector is now tasked for QUANTUM. and we
wait to get access to his box.

IISHSIHF‘IEL] Cine of the reasons why I'd only lookfor Active User logins within a certain timeframe of
an SSH session. is that I want to make sure to find accounts that are actually associated with the
admin. and not some other random person who happened to receive that same IF' via DHCP the
next day [or something like that].

IISHSIHREL] The previous few posts have gone into some fun ways that we can harvest the power
of the SIISINTs to target sys admins of foreign networks. My next post will go into an uber—simple
waythat we can tryto detect when people other than the legitimate sys admin have access to a
router {oh yeah. ﬁnd me somrna that cybert].

IISHSIHF‘IEL] I'm sure there are other fun and innovative ways to go about this. feel free to share
them if you think of any Also feel free to take any of the above thoughtsiideas and use them for
your own purposes IIlike IAD maintaining a list of IP's that we see password guessing in SISINT‘?].
As always. if you have any questions. or want more info. feel free to drop me an e-mail or leave a
comment!

Current Mood:juche-licious

21 comments :: Leave a comment

 

T-I-F' IZE-I'FLETI_-'!3I_-'_-'FLEL TO USE. F"'-'E"J.'

copyright! {S.-".-"Sl.-".-"FIEL) l hunt people who hack reuters (part 5) E {hide-1'

2012.12.14- 01: Ill} pm
[In nut reuse

_ _ Entryr tags: cne. discereute. rcnuter. sigdev
this Image!

 

IITSHSIHRELII Happy Friday my esteemed and valued Intelligence Cdmmunity cdlleagues! There has
been a tcpic bf cdnversaticn that has started tb rumble beneath the surface cf the |Cyber—scene
lately. it's abdut rduter hackingIIfcIr this past. I'm nbt talking abdut ydur hdme ADSL rduter. I'm
talking abdut bigger rcuters. such as CisccsﬂuniperslHuaweis used by ISPs fdr their
infrastructure]. Hacking rcuters has been gdcd business fcr us and bur S-eyes partners fcr same
time ndw. but it is becdming more apparent that bther natibn states are hdning their skill: and
jdining the scene. Eiefcure | get intc it tdd much. let's gc cver sdme cf the things that sdmedne
cculd dd ifthey hack a rcuter:

*‘rbu cculd add credentials. allcwing ydurselftd leg in any time ycu chcdse

*‘Tbu cculd addi'change rcuting rules

* ‘T'bu cbuld set up a packet capture capability..imagine running Wireshark an an ISP's
infrastructure rcuter...|ike a lccal listening pdst fdr any credentials being passed ever the wireflll

* ‘Tbu cculd weaken any ‘v'F’N encryptidn capabilities an the rcuter. fbrcing it td create easily
decryptable tunnels

*‘rbu cculd install a dcrked versidn cf the Dperating System with whatever functidnality ycu want
pre-built in

IITSHSIHRELII There are a plethcra cf things ydu cculd dc dnce ydu get ENE access td a
rcuter...suffice it tc say. getting access tc a rcuter is very gppd fer the actcr. and very bad far
the victim. Sb. we wduld dbvidusly .Lﬂ'v'E td knew which CDUF‘Itl’lESfECtDFS have access td what dther
rcuters {especially if it's bur rcutersl. Then the guesticn cdmes dcwn td:

"wa would you identify the fact that sameane has ENE access th a rbuter?”

[TSHSIHRELJ There are a handful bf ways that ybu can tell if anycne has access tb yclur rcuter.
Like. if you are free tb lbg intd ydur dwn rduter. ydu cduld frequently lag in. run diagndstic
ccmmands. pull the IDS IIcr. mcre generically. the dperating system file]. hash that file. and
ccmpare that tc a list bf kncwn-gdbd hashes. But. hcw wculd ybu find but if sbmecne has ENE
access tb a router that ydu ddn't awn? Hdw wduld ydu identify it if the Chinese had access td a
rcuter in Eimbabwe? If all ydu have is passive netwdrk trafﬁc that we've cdllected in SIGINT. hcw
wduld yen dd it?

The rest bf this past relates tb NSA's methdds td detect when cduntries hack rcuters. We
have redacted it td prevent helping thdse cduntries imprdve their ability td hack fdreign
rcuters and spy an pedple undetected.

