SIDToday - '4th Party Collection': Taking Advantage of Non-Partner Computer Network Exploitation Activity

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(Sl/SI/IREL) '4th Party Collection': Taking Advantage of Non-Partner
Computer Network Exploitation Activity

FROM: —

Menwith Hill Station (F77)
Run Date: 01/07/2008

 

(U//FOUO) This article is reprinted from Menwith Hill Station's Horizon newsletter:
December edition.

10f3

SIDToday - '4th Party Collection': Taking Advantage of Non-Partner Computer Network Exploitation Activity

 

(S//SI//REL) The Menwith Hill Station Computer Network Operations team has
been working on developing methods of "4th Party Collection" - a technique that
allows the Intelligence Community to take advantage of non-S-eyes computer
network exploitation (CNE) activity. The exploitation activity may be state-
sponsored or opportunistic, but when one target nation is gathering data on
another target nation, the Intelligence Community (IC) may be able to use that
information.

(S/lSll/REL) Initial development in this arena has focused on developing capability
against keyboard loggers (keyloggers), speciﬁcally attempts by the Kurdistan
Democratic Party against several targets. A keylogger is software or hardware that
has been installed, either co-operatively or maliciously, on a computer to capture
key strokes, screen captures, chats, passwords, logins, etc. Keylogger activity is
quite prevalent and is being used to identify activity on computers related to IC
targets.

(S//SI//REL) MHS is interested not only in the data that is being ex-ﬁltrated, but
also in who is installing the keylogging software to initiate that ex-ﬁltration. Some
initial work has already identiﬁed a network believed to be associated with the
Kurdistan Security Service. Research has shown that CNE activities targeting
civilian and government individuals and computer networks are taking place in

several locations: the northern Iraq city of Erbil,1 various locations in Iran, and
some Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs computers.

(S/lSll/REL) The method of exploitation involves the use of a commercial keylogger
called "Perfect Keylogger." This keylogger records data from the computer it is

installed on and emails the data to a conﬁgurable email address.2 The data from
these activities are being emailed to accounts that trace back to terminals believed
to be associated with the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP).

(S//SI//REL) Image represents a sampling of the data taken from keylogger reports
between the last week ofNovember and the ﬁrst week ofDecember 2007.

(S/lSll/REL) The computer networks being targeted appear to be internet cafés in
both Iran and Iraq. Email addresses from at least ﬁve different private domains are
receiving the keylogger reports. These domains are all registered in Erbil, Iraq. In
all cases, the targeted individuals appear to be inﬂuential and were probably
chosen because they have links with the Kurdistan Regional Government. At least
one Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs computer has also been compromised by this
CNE activity. The keylogger reports that are targeting individuals are being sent to
gmail accounts, which may indicate that the person receiving the ex-ﬁltrated data
wants to be able to access it from different locations. The email addresses of the
person(s) receiving the keylogger reports have been associated to MAC addresses
which are believed to belong to the KDP.

(S//SI//REL) Keyloggers can give analysts information such as login/passwords,
additional email addresses, phone numbers, and documents that reside on the
victim's computer that might never have been seen via traditional SIGINT.

Information on the CNE activity by the KDP has been passed to the analysts in

20f3

SIDToday - '4th Party Collection': Taking Advantage of Non-Partner Computer Network Exploitation Activity
production at MHS, the Kurd TOPI {Target Ofﬁce of Primary Interest) at NSA
Georgia, and the NSA/CSS Threat Operations Center.

(U/IFOUO) For additional information on "4th party collection," contact the MHS
CNO team at

(U) Notes:

 

1 (U) Also called lrbil and Arbil

2(U) Conﬁgurable - Registered domain on the internet that allows the owner to
make their own email addresses.

"(U/lFOUO) SIDtoday
articles may not be
republished or
reposted outside
NSANet without the

consent of SD 121

 

DYNAMIC PAGE --
HIGHEST POSSIBLE
CLASSIFICATION IS

TOP SECRET // SI / TK
// REL TO USA AUS
CAN GBR NZL

DERIVED FROM:

NSA/CSSM 1-52,
DATED 08 JAN 2007

DECLASSIFY ON:

20320108

30f3

