SECRET

Crypt Dps Data Store User Guide
Crypt Dps Datastore

DataStore Rota:

~Data Store to be reviewed weekly at the DataStore management meeting

The Tasking Process

Submitting a Task

1.
2.

E.

The customer follows the links to the Data Store page and clicks ’Add Record’.
The ﬁelds ’Crypt Task PDC’. ‘Updates’ and ’Team Plan Ref should all be left
blank. to be filled in later by Crypt |Dps.

3. All ﬁelds marked with an * must be completed.
4.
5. The ’Task Status’ should be left as ’New Task’ and the ’Record Status’ should

The Required by Date should be changed.

be left set to ’Draft’.
|Dnce all necessary ﬁelds are completed click ’Submit’.

|Dnce submitted the task will be dealt with as follows:

Processing a Task

1. The DS (Data Store} Admin team is notified ofthat a Task has been
submitted.

2. The ’on duty’ Admin reviews the task. assessing what category (see below} it
falls into and passes it along to the appropriate TL (team leader}.

Categories

— BR BULLRUN —

— CTSC Counter Terrorism and Serious Crime

— EA Electronic Attack

— GT Global Targets

— HCA Hand Crypt and SMS

— lleNA Middle East North Africa

— M08 Mobile Infrastructure

— PRS Password Recovery Service

— TD |Generic Target Discovery

— TR Technical Research

— VPN Virtual Private Networks

— SIG |Generic or complex signature development.

 

possibly to include XKS fingerprinting (and TDIJ’BEGAL in the future?)

And possibly more. including:

SECRET

SECRET

TTT “.3”? Tech Tracking and Trends — Requests fcr
tech tracking cr trends data
EP “.3”? Requests BEARDED PIGGY acccunts

The DS Admin nctifies the TL cf the task and updates it changing the PDC to
the TL’s sid and adding a ncte tc the ‘Updates’ field in the fcllcwing fcrmai:

‘Passed tc :TL’s sid> cn :ddi’mmi’yy‘: by :DS Admin’s sid>’

DS Admin then sends an email to the task criginatcr nctifying them which TL
is handling the task.

If the task is inapprcpriate fcr |Crypt Dps cr is cne that there will be nc
rescurces available for in the fcreseeable future then the TL changes the Task
Status tc ‘Rejected’ and nctifies the task criginatcr explaining why the task has
been rejected. The task’s Reccrd Status is then set to ’Archive’.

If it is an apprcpriate achievable task the TL takes the fcllcwing steps:

- Determine what pricrity the task shculd be

- Decide if the timescale is achievable given the available rescurces and
perscnnel

- Decide if the necessary rescurces are available

- If an apprcpriate perscn is available assign them

Ta |f rescurces are net currently available but the task is cne that Crypt Dps will
definitely ccmplete scme time in the near future when rescurces are available the
TL shculd ccntact thetasks criginatcr and infcrm them cf when, realistically,
rescurces will be available and wcrk started.

Tb. If they still wish the task to be undertaken then a new timescale shculd be

negctiated.

Tc. The Task Status shculd then be set tc ‘Suspended’ and the Reccrd Status is
left as ’Draft’.

1". These tasks will be checked as part cf the Data Stcre review tc ensure that

9.

1f].

'l'lx

"I .5: ' :- '. 'l 1.:  'l 1:-  .' 1 'i' 

wcrk starts cn them as seen as rescurces beccme available.

Dnce this is dcne the tasks Reccrd Status is set to ’Current’, the Task Status
is set tc Sitssigned’ and the update field shculd be filled in as fcllcws:

Wcrk tc be carried cut by :cassignees sid> starting cn :cddi’mmi’yy‘: assigned
by :TL’s sid>

'l "|.!: ' _::..!: '.|-: | ' ::.  ' :. :.::.: ...:.,||IgI

SECRET

SECRET
1D. The TL then informs the task originator of the update.

11. Once the assignee begins work the Task Status should be set to ’ln
Rrogress’.

12. The OS Admin’s review all task weekly to ensure they are being acted on and
that all timescales and on schedule. If atimescale is deemed unrealistic then
the TL should be informed and should negotiate a new deadline with the task
originator.

13. Once atask is completed the Task Status should be set to ’Complete’ and
the Record Status changed to ’Archive’.

14. The task originator should be informed that the task is officially complete and
where possible feed back obtain ed.

15. IMPORTANT: Remember to keep both the ’Record Status’ and ’Task Status’
fields up to date and make sure thatthe record is in the correct category. The
NEW TASK status should only be used on newtasks still in DRAFT. once
ASSIGNED the task should be moved immediately to CURRENT. once work
is started the task status should be IN PROGRESS and once COMPLETE it
should be moved to ARCHI’v’E.

Searching DataStore (Only applicable to mose winb view privileges)
There are two search options atthe top of the page; Text Search and Date Search.

Text Search — this allows searching on a number of ﬁelds (listed below} both in the
page and within the records themselves. This search type is useful for ﬁnding all the
tasks owned by a speciﬁc individual or all the tasks of aspecific type (providing the
category tag has been applied to the ’Task Title’.

Task Title

Team Requesting
Task Status

Crypt Task ROC
Originator

Task Classiﬁcation
JlC Points

JlC Priority
Miranda

l-lRA Justiﬁcation
Expected Outcome
Business Case
Estimated Resources
Updates

Team Plan Ref

 

'lllx 'l --..::- _::..:: -.I-: I - --

SECRET

SECRET

Date SeaIch — there me three sub categcries cfthis seaIch; ‘Nc date seaIch’ (which
searches for reccrd with nc date set in the chcsen ﬁeld}, ‘SeaIch fer a single date’, cr
‘SeaIch [NET a date range’. These seaIches can be ccnducted cn several ﬁelds;
Required by Date’, ‘Date Submitted’, ‘Date last updated’ and ‘Date Task Ccmpleted’.

This search is useful fcr finding all the tasks that need tc be ccmpleted by a specific
date.

The seaIch types can be used in ccncert ed. tasks with SIG in the title with a

required by date between 01f05f2011 and UBﬂDi’EDll, this is achieved by running
cne seaIch and then the ether.

_.|..|_!: . ._ ,_.|::|..| :._  .:.:. |_. :.| ||.|..|_E: .  ---- --....|

:I-I-I'h -I --n.=: -  -.I-: I -   - : --:--: .."..'II:;- 
SECRET

