VoIP NSA alias - GCWiki

UK TOP SECRET
The maximum classiﬁcation allowed on GCWiki is TOP SECRET STRAPI
COMINT.

VoIP NSA alias

From GCWiki
Jump to: navigation, search

SAMESHEET is a group for discussing media over packet in the SIGINT community.
It initially dealt with just VOIP, but has expanded its scope. These notes get mailed
out after each monthly meeting {usually held the third Wednesday of every month.)
Look for reminders, calls for Agenda items, and notes on the voip@nsa alias. This
alias can be joined at: m

This GCHQ record of SAMESHEET meetings is ended in favour of NSA's
version at: ]_1.

I encourage all those who have an interest to join NSA's alias directly.

Contents

0 4.3 IETF San Diego

0 7.5 VON Boston

0 8 IETF SIP, TIiD ReDort

 

10f39

VoIP NSA alias - GCWiki

 

[ ] IETF San Diego

(S/ICCO)—opened the meeting with a synopsis of the highlights from
this past months IETF meeting in San Diego. The IETF has been at the forefront of
Internet standards development over the last few decades and is responsible for the
SIP standard and future extensions. Of Sigint signiﬁcance-passed on a few
items such as the Globally Routable User—agent URI (GRUU) which is intended to
represent a speciﬁc piece of hardware of software instance for selection.
Implementations of the GRUU have been slowed due to privacy concerns.
Additionally, new session policy extensions may improve our ability to passively
target two sided communications by the incorporation of detailed call information
being included with XML imbedded in SIP messages. On the security front, SRTP
has been slow in the uptake do to key management limitations. At the meeting
however there was a significant amount of discussion surrounding Zimmerman's (of
PGP fame) ZRTP showing an easier to implement solution. SPEERMINT has been
very active as well discussing standards for multi and unilateral peering as well as
initial interest in standardization of the Session Border Controller services. Finally
peer—to—peer SIP is heating up which may lead to the formation of a new IETF

40f39

VoIP NSA alias - GCWiki

working group. This meetin 5 full minutes as well as previous meetings will be
posted to:

also attended

 

VoIP NSA alias - GCWiki

 

[ ] VON Boston

(Ul/FOUO) Three attendees of this months meeting,
and _were able to attend this years Fall VON in Boston.

notes can be found at:

Next Meetings

 

October 18th - Room 3W083-2 (tentative) - 1:00pm - 3:00pm Featured topic - IAD
VoIP Vulnerability Analysis

November 15th — Room 2W03 7—2 — 2:00pm — 4:00pm Featured topic — TBD — Please
send suggestions/requests!

[ ] Attendees:

 

Thanks,—
[ ] IETF SIP, Trip Report

18/09/06 (SI/SI) X71's Network convergence project has posted a trip report from

July's Internet Engineering Task Force, by _. This report
describes developments at the IETF in SIP and SIP—related protocols. This report

includes observations on SIP-based location conveyance (p. 6 and 10), new media
types (p. 11), migration of communication services to SIP (p. 9), plans/issues for

15 of 39

VoIP NSA alias - GCWiki

media encryption (p. 12-14), and information on pace of service provider adoption
of SIP for presence and instant messaging (p.1 5-16). Sprinkled throughout are
observations on how user identiﬁers may be changing {p.5,7,8). The executive
summary gives thumbnail sketches of each of these.

(U) The report is available on the "trip reports" section of our web site:

 

