SIDToday - Interview with a SID "Hacker" -- Part 1: How Does TAO Do Its Work?

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U/IFOUO) Interview with a SID "Hacker" -- Part 1: How Does TAO Do Its
Work?

FROM: - the SIDtoday Editor

Run Date: 07/12/201 2

 

(S/lREL) One organization that has grown substantially in recent years
is Tailored Access Operations (832), the group that hacks our targets'

lof4

SIDToday - Interview with a SID "Hacker" -- Part 1: How Does TAO Do Its Work?

computers. — (pictured), a counterterrorism subject-
matter expert in TAO's Requirements and Targeting organization,
spoke with SIDtoday recently to explain how TAO carries out its work:

 

 

1. (U/IFOUO) What do TAO Requirements 8: Targeting analysts like
you do? -- What's your role?

(U) Our role in R&T is to serve as a liaison with the TOPIs in 82. We work with the
TOPIs to ﬁnd out what they really want in terms of ONE [computer-network
exploitation] collection and then work within TAO to ﬁgure out how to get it... To
give you a quick overview, there are different elements in TAO:

- (U//FOUO) First there are are the developers who create the software and
the hardware -- the tools that TAO uses to carry out our collection.

0 (U/lFOUO) Next are the operators in the ROC [Remote Operations Center]
who actually use the tools. They do the actual collection of intelligence from
the targets' systems, while showing good OPSEC [operations security] and
making sure our tools themselves are protected.

0 (U/lFOUO) And then there is my element, Requirements and Targeting. We are
the analysts and planners for operations. We ﬁnd out what the TOPIs are
looking for, do the network analysis, and draw up a plan for getting that
collection.

- (U//FOUO) Supporting it all are the folks who provide the infrastructure. They
provide the computers, networks, etc. and keep everything running.

(Ul/FOUO) Each group brings a different skill to the table. Regarding the tools we
use, the developers know the coding for them, the operators know how to use
them, and R&T just knows that they exist. R&T's focus is on where we can
apply the tools to get the intelligence we want.

(Ul/FOUO) In TAO, we all have to work hand-in-glove. Often the analysts are eager
to grab whatever intelligence we can, while the operators are more conscious of
the risks involved, so we meet somewhere in between. Each side brings their own
perspective and it creates checks and balances.

(Ul/FOUO) The ROC does after-action reviews of operations -- every action taken is
automatically recorded -- to make sure things were done appropriately. Operators
have to be certiﬁed -- and they can have their certiﬁcations pulled -- so they have a
strong incentive to show good OPSEC.

2. (U/IFOUO) Do R&T analysts participate when operations are
carried out in the ROC? If so, how does it play out?

(U/lFOUO) Yes, the RSzT analysts actually sit side-by-side with the ROC operators
when an operation takes place. We're there to provide knowledge of the
networks, and the operators, as I mentioned, know how to use the tools to
extract the data.

(U/lFOUO) Nowadays there are dedicated analysts and operators working on

20f4

SIDToday - Interview with a SID "Hacker" -- Part 1: How Does TAO Do Its Work?

speciﬁc targets. 80, for example, I work the CT [counterterrorism] target, and we
have counterpart operators who focus on CT, too. {In the past, we analysts would
have shown up for an operation and been assigned an operator randomly out of a
pool.) The beneﬁt of this new approach is that the analysts and operators can
develop working relationships and collaborate ahead of time on an upcoming
operation.

(U/IFOUO) In terms of how an operation is scheduled, our analysts decide to work
a project and start to do research on targets to go after. Next we get approvals
through the ROC mission directors to pursue operations against those targets. The
mission directors are a small group of people with lots of experience. They assess
the risks involved in the operation and approve or deny it. Once we have the
approval, the analysts plan an operation in coordination with an operator and,
when they are ready, arrange a speciﬁc time to carry it out. We have the ﬂexibility
to conduct the operation at the optimal time.

(U/IFOUO) In the early days TAO used to be just a bunch of hackers! We did things
in a more ad hoc manner... one guy did it all. Now we're more systematic in how we
do things.

(S/lSI//REL) In the CT world, we usually go after the infrastructure (like an ISP
[internet service provider]) or after the speciﬁc target in end-point collection --
extracting data from a speciﬁc "box" [computer or device]. Normally collection is
automated for end-point, but sometimes it's an interactive, real-time event when
the target is up on the net. The latter happens quite a bit in CT. The operations
might take place at 2AM or 6AM, since that is when the target is active. Some CT
targets use really slow dial-up connections from remote places in the Pakistani
tribal areas, and we have to move quickly when the opportunity presents itself.

 

(U) ...Do you need linguists to participate in your operations, to
translate the names of the ﬁles, etc?

(S//SI/REL) Not as much as you might think. We don't evaluate the content of the
data, we just collect it. Usually we have an idea of what types of ﬁles and
information the TOPIs are interested in -- like text ﬁles -- and we try to grab all of it
for analysis later. We don't take the time during the operation to sort out the good
from the bad.

(U) Stand by for the conclusion of this interview, appearing tomorrow. [Editor's
note: click HERE]

"(U/lFOUO) SIDtoday
articles may not be
republished or
reposted outside

30f4

SIDToday - Interview with a SID "Hacker" -- Part 1: How Does TAO D0 Its Work?

NSANet without the
consent of 50121

 

DYNAMIC PAGE --
HIGHEST POSSIBLE
CLASSIFICATION IS

TOP SECRET // SI / TK
// REL TO USA AUS
CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM:
NSA/CSSM 1—52,
DATED 08 JAN 2007
DECLASSIEY ON:
20320108

40f4

