TOP SECRET
Crypt Discovery
Joint Collaboration Activity
20 January 2011

Activity Owners
NSA
GCHQ

Overview

Our Internet Exploitation capability is built upon our ability to effectively conduct
target development and target discovery from IP data. One target discovery strategy
is to spot patterns of Internet activity (communications, web browsing, web searching,
etc) from which analysts infer suspicious behaviour or intent. Developing Target
Detection Identifiers (TDIs), Internet presence data and other key metadata elements
are critical enablers for achieving success.

The spread of encryption, particularly Transport Layer Security (TLS), which was
previously known as Security Sockets Layer (SSL), and Internet Protocol Security
(IPSec), threatens our ability to do effective target discovery/development because
pertinent metadata events will be locked within the encrypted channels and difficult, if
not impossible, to prise out.

These activities are designed to get a sound understanding of the threat that
encryption brings to our ability to do target discoveryldevelopment as well as devising
mitigations that will (hopefully) allow our Internet Exploitation strategy to prevail.

Plan

Performing discovery within and beyond encryption will require new solutions. We
will be investigating and creating solutions in these areas:

1. Monitor the prevalence of encrypted usage within encryption technologies (https,
vpn, etc) and across the Internet and into our SIGINT targets” domain. The
questions we would like to get into a position to answer are:

a. What percentage of encryption are we seeing in all traffic? What is the
trend over time?

b. What percentage of encrypted traffic is associated with a target? Trends?

c. What percentage of targets are using TLS, IPSec, or other encryption
technologies? Trends?

d. How are these figures above broken out across the encrypted web
services available (webmail, web searches, geo mapping, web fora, IM,
social networking, online shopping, online banking, etc)? Split out the
webmail stats per provider. Trends?

e. What are the most common https sites visited (in all traffic)? Trends?

What are the most common https sites visited by targets? What is the

profile of usage? Trends?

—h

Derived From: NSA/CSSM 1-52
Dated: 20070108
Declassify On: 20360101
TOP SECRET

TOPSECRET

2. Assess the threat of https to our current exploitation capabilities and to our future
intent

a. Which of our presence and communications metadata (including TDls) will
be lost under encrypted channels?

b. What is the impact of this loss to our Target Discovery and Target
Development tradecraft?

c. What is the impact of this loss to our ability to cross-correlate TDls and run
more complex queries against our data?

3. Understand and improve our pairing rates within an access and between access
points?

a. What can be paired from what can be viewed?

b. What could be paired between sites (demonstrate correlation between
collaboration environment and TICKETWINDOW sites for example)?

0. What are the volumes of paired encrypted links and would our CA
services be able to handle these?

d. Can we optimise our passive collection by analysing pairing rates per
country and per service level?

e. How can the cloud enable better pairing by leveraging it's ability to look
over time?

4. Research new methods for maintaining an effective TD tradecraft and mitigating
the threat of encrypted http traffic.

a. Are there other TDls or “TDl-like” identifiers we can develop that can
identify users or machines of interest, despite our targets using https? How
effective are these? (e.g. are the TDls persistent across sessions, do they
uniquely identify a user or machine, do we always appear in user
sessions?)

b. Can we characterise lPSec sessions from ESP metadata analysis (e.g.
using duration, packet length, burstiness)?

c. How can we best analyze decrypted VPN traffic to develop effective TD
tradecraft for VP Ns.

d. Can we use Internet presence or communications metadata with network
analysis techniques to identify high-value sessions? (gah: do you think this
sits better under (3) above?)

e. Can we combine knowledge from session processing and content with
metadata to enable better methods.

Acquire an understanding for how much more challenging (or easier!) this problem is
in the Mobile Internet context, and whether any of the mitigations from (4) above lend
themselves to discovering targets behind Mobile Gateways.

20f3

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of lnlorrnation Act 2000 and ma r be sub‘ect to exern )LlUll under
otlier UK inlorrnation legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on

TOPSECRET

 
 

TOP SECRET

Technical Requirements

The ability to understand and track encryption as well as develop new methods as
outlined above requires the use of existing metadata from NSA and GCHQ
processing system, the ability to create new metadata to test the viability of it's use
for the creation of new methods and to enhance existing data, the ability to correlate
across what is known (strongly selected content) with metadata and potentially the
ability to examine deeper into sessions for evaluation of exploitability. To accomplish
the goals above, the following will be used in the .10 environment:

a A Joint Collaboration (JC) cloud that contains the following metadata sources:

0

00000

O

MUTANT BROTH
BEARDED PIGGY
KARMA POLICE
MEMORY HOLE
MARBLED GECKO
SOCIAL ANIMAL
ASDF metadata

0 Selected content

0

Related to encryption or specific target sets

a Ability to create new metadata or selected content as needed through XKS or
other local processing sources.
0 Inclusion of enrichment data

0

TBD

u Ability to interact with CA server internal to the JC environment

3of3

Tliis irilorriiatiori is exempt from disclosure Liiitler the Freedom of liilorriiatlori Act 2000 arid ma r be stib‘eet to exem )LlUll tiiitler

otlier UK liilorriiatiori leglslatloii. Refer tllselostire requests to GCHQ Ull

  

TOP SECRET

