TOP SECRET STRAPl
Innov

Experiment Profile

 

 

 

 

 

 

Experiment Name Cryptanalytic Experiment
SerVIces Reference
Version Date
(NSA) NSAIS3ICES
Experiment Owner — Department GCHQIPTD
(GCHQ)
Experiment Start Date 06l01l2010 Experiment End Date Early 2011

 

 

 

 

Part 1 — Experiment Overview

 

Business Case I

 

 

As part of the Joint Capability Activity (JCA) in partnership with GCHQ, experiments
are to be conducted within the Joint Capability Experiment (JCE) to test the
robustness, scalability and interoperability of cryptanalytic services integrated into
the corporate high speed DNI architectures of each agency. The cryptanalytic
services experiment will explore a new hardware configuration for sensitive
cryptanalytic mission applications integrated into a secure processing enclave
interfacing to the corporate high speed DNI architecture. This will also include the
testing of hardware accelerated decryption at the frontend. The business case for
running this experiment is to demonstrate the following:

— Stress the processing capability under heavy load of “tasked” common
internet encryption technologies
— Test the throughput capability of common internet encryption
technologies processing including:
- Higher bandwidth common internet encryption technologies
streams
- Throughput of ISLANDTRANSPORT messaging support for CA
Service requests to NSAW LONGHAUL key recovery service
- The temporary storage of encrypted data while waiting for a
response from LONGHAUL
— Test the Hardware accelerated (CAVIUM card) common internet
encryption technologies processing component
— Test the impact of XKEYSCORE as Stage 2 of TU RMOIL for follow on
processing of exploited common internet encryption technologies

 

 

streams
lnnov8 Experiment Profile Template V0.2 1 Of 8
This iiiiorriiaiioii is exempL from disclosure under Llie Freedom of liilormailoii ACL 2000 and may be sleleeL Lo exempiloii wider

oLlier UK liilormailoii legislation. Reler Lllselosure requests to GCHQ Ull

TOP SECRET STRAPl

 

TOP SECRET STRAPl

 

Benefits

 

 

 

Outcome Expected Benefit How will KPI (CSF) Reference
benefit be Number
measured?

 

Validation of the new
hardware chosen for
cryptanalytic
processing

 

Integration of hardware
accelerated decryption

 

Ability to cope with high
throughput and
bandwidth of common
internet encryption
technologies

 

Ability to prioritize
processing
appropriately

 

Ability to process
multiple common
internet encryption
technologies
exploitation capabilities
concurrently

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Plan

 

 

The cryptanalytic Services processing experiment will consist of several additive
experiments. The first two will mostly consist of preparatory work. The subsequent
experiment will explore scalability and interoperability.

Note that the below list is not exhaustive; this represents the initial list of experiments
to be conducted in JCE with respect to cryptanalytic services. Subsequent
experimentation upon conclusion of the below experiments will be negotiated with
INNOV8 as appropriate.

EXP. 1: Test dataflow (~1 month) This experiment will set up and configure the new
cryptanalytic processing hardware as well as basic dataflows into the cryptanalytic
services for further experimentation. Streaming dataflows of common internet
encryption technologies and ISLANDTRANSPORT dataflows to LONGHAUL for
cryptanalytic recovery will be established. This experiment will ensure that the
cryptanalytic services can properly process data using existing capabilities from NSA-
centric TURMOIL systems. Additionally. the appropriate analytics will be put in place
and evaluated to identify viable candidate input streams (case notations) containing
the common internet encryption technologies of interest.

EXP. 2: Stress testing (~1 month) This experiment will stress test the current suite of
cryptanalytic services to identify the baseline throughput and scalability parameters.

 

lnnov8 Experiment Profile Template V0.2 2 Of 8

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 anti may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on—
TOP SECRET STRAP].

 

 

TOPSECRETSTRAPl

 

This experiment will leverage and validate candidate input streams (case notations)
containing the common internet encryption technologies of interest.

EXP. 3: Integration of new cryptanalytic processing functionality (4-6 months)
This experiment will introduce new and enhanced capabilities to increase throughput,
scalability and interoperability. This will include but not be limited to hardware
accelerated decryption, agile management of buffered encrypted data. the
development of an interoperable API for sharing CA services requests across
NSAICES and GCHQIPTD key recovery architectures, the ability for follow-on
processing architectures to consume large volumes exploited common internet
encryption technologies of interest.

 

 

PUT Involvement

 

 

Team members include:

0 NSA
- CES
- Tll
- T53
o GCHQ
- CCNE/PTD

 

 

Migration Approach

 

 

 

The goal is to transition new cryptanalytic capabilities as they are tested and validated
in the JCE environment into the JPC operational environment to provide mission
value.

 

lnnov8 Experiment Profile Template V0.2 3 Of 8

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of lnlormation Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under
other UK inlormation legislation. Reler disclosure requests to GCHQ on

TOPSECRETSTRAPl

 

 

 

TOP SECRET STRAPl

Part 2 - Experiment Detail

 

High Level Description of
Experiment

 

 

 

Same as Business case.

 

 

System & Network Diagrams

 

 

System & Network Diairams

Exploitation of Common Internet Encryption
Technologies

  
 
  
  

 

 

Validation of
results

 

CA Service Requests

  
 
 

«— -i>
NSAICES

Enclave
boundary

 

Storage
Of a ncrypted
co rite nt

  

H ardware
Accelerated
Decryption

 

 

 

 

Hardware Requirements

 

The cryptanalytic services experiment requires the inclusion of 4 IBM 3650 M3
servers (2 servers per 106 LPT) to run the sensitive cryptanalytic mission
applications. The cryptanalytic processing servers are dedicated to cryptanalytic
processing and are firewalled off from the rest of the LPT system. These are an
extension of the NSA/CES cryptanalytic enclave and can only be administered by
CES approved sys-admins. This will include appropriately cleared GCHQIPTD for
monitoring and auditing purposes. The individuals will need to have a minimum of ECI
PIQARESQU E. The results of cryptanalytic processing will be TSIISIIREL FVEY for
the purposes of this experiment.

 

 

Software Requirements

 

 

 

Owner should detail here any additional software requirements and the steps taken to procure the
required items. Note: All software shouid be registered with SAM.

 

Innov8 Experiment Profile Template V0.2 4 Of 8

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under
other UK information iegislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on

TOP SECRET STRAPl

 

 

 

 

TOP SECRET STRAPl

 

Connectivity (Dataflows)

 

 

The success of the cryptanalytic services experiment relies on the ability to extract
and pass crypto-synch parameters associated with common internet encryption
technologies to NSAW/LONGHAUL for cryptanalytic attack and recovery. The crypto-
synch parameters are extracted in the cryptanalytic processing servers and passed to
NSAWILONGHAUL via a corporate messaging system (ISLANDTRANSPORT)
connection. The messages are encrypted prior to leaving the cryptanalytic processing
servers using the secure corporate messaging software (ISLANDHIDEAWAY) for
security and authentication.

 

 

Data Requirements

 

 

This experiment will leverage and validate candidate input streams (case notations)
containing the common internet encryption technologies of interest.

 

 

Data Repositories

 

 

 

Legalities

 

 

 

 

Additional Support

 

 

 

 

Data Access

 

 

 

 

External Dependencies

 

 

 

 

Previous I Related Work

 

 

 

 

lnnov8 Experiment Profile Template V0.2 5 Of 8

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of lnlormation Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK inlormation legislation. Reler disclosure requests to GCHQ on —
TOP SECRET STRAPl

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TOP SECRET STRAPl

Innev8 Experiment Profile Template V0.2 6 Of 8

Tiiis iiiforriidlioii is (‘XGHHJL from disciosiiro Liiidor Lilo Froodorii of IiilorriidLioii ACL 2000 and may be SUiJjL‘CL Lo (‘XL‘HHJUUH LIHLiL‘i'

oLiiUr UK iiilorriiaLioii iogisldlioii. RL‘iL‘i' disclosure requests to GCHQ UH—
TOP SECRET STRAP].

TOP SECRET STRAPl

 

 

Access Control

 

 

Serial Access Given Full Name HRA Training ECI Cleared Role PF No.
YIN

e.g. Root/User — Y Developer 11111

 

Innov8 Experiment Profile Template V0.2 7 Of 8

Tlris information is exempL from disclosure Lmder Lire Freedom ol InformdLiori Am 2000 and may be subject to exenmliori Lmder oLiIer UK irilormaliorr legisldLi

TOP SECRET STRAPl

SEG Reviewers

Post
GCH Service Owner
NSA Service Owner
|nnov8 Service Man
|nnov8 En ineeri
|nnov8 Su rt Team
|nnov8 Co Iiance Man
Data Owner
Selector
ACD (Dataflow)

echni

nt Team

8808 Representative
OP P-LEG

IT Services
IT Services
Bude SSE
TFE-SSE
TPS

SAM Re resentative
Secu Worki Grou

ude

TOPSECRETSTRAPl

 

Changes to Experiment Profile

Version Amendment Date

|nnov8 Experiment Profile Template V0.2

es to the

 

80f8

III-IIIIIIIIIIII
TOPSECRETSTRAPl

