TOP SECRET STRAPl COMINT

BULLRUN Col — Briefing Sheet

Introduction

1.

The ability to exploit targets’ encrypted communications is extremely fragile and is
often enabled through sensitive ECI programmes. The need to take additional
measures to protect that capability has Ion been recognised. Currentiy, virtually
all decryption is carried out by PTD ﬂ processing with decrypts going to
the HE in the NDCDN Col; some decrypts are placed in the ENDUE Col due to
the sensitivity or fragility of the exploitation capability.

In recent years there has been an aggressive effort; lead by NSA, to make major
improvements in defeatng network security and privacy involving multiple
sources and methods, all of which are extremely sensitive and fragile. These
include: Computer Network Exploitation (CHE); collaboration with other
Intelligence Agencies; investment in high—performance computers; and
development of advanced mathematical techniques. Several ECI compartments
may apply to the specific sources, methods, and techniques involved.

Making the best use of these new capabilities requires that decryption processing
be widely deployed beyond PTD and the results of that processing be available to
awide range of analysts. This inevitably makes it harder to protect this sensitive
and fragile capability and we need to counterbalance this by introducing
measures to control access to this material and heighten awareness of the
sensitivities amongst those who have access.

To achieve this, NSA has introduced the BULLRUN Col to protect our abilities to
defeat the encryption used in network communication technologies. This covers
both the "fact of‘ acapability against a specific technology and resulting decrypts
(which may be either plaintext or metadata (events). GCHQ is also introducing
EULLRUN. (CSEC, DSD and GCSB are expected to do likewise.)

Control Authority

5.

The BULLRUN Col is owned by the Deputy Director for Penetrating Target
Defences (PTD). Authority to manage the Col is dele ated to the PTD Lead for
Special Operations and Policy (currently and the PTD Security
and Release Authority (DPC—SEC, currentiy_}.

BULLRUN Sensitivity and Coverage

5.

:- 'Illx 'l --..::- _:-..:: -.I-: I - --

It is imperative to protect the fact that GCHQ, NSA and their Sigint partners have
capabilities against speciﬁc network security technologies as well as the number
and scope of successes. These capabilities are among the Sigint community’s
most fragile, and the inadvertent disclosure of the simple "fact of‘ could alert the
adversary and result in immediate loss of the capability. Con sequently, any
admission of "fact of” a capability to defeat encryption used in speciﬁc network
communication technologies or disclosure of details relating to that capability
must be protected by the BULLRUN CDI and restricted to those specifically

lofril

TOP SECRET STRAPl COMINT

_.|..|_!:.__._.|::|..l:__  .:.:. |_.

TOP SECRET STRAPl COMINT
indcctrinated fcr EULLRUN. The varicus types cf security ccvered by BULLRUN
in clude, but are net limited to, TLSiSSL, https (e.g. webmail}, SSH, encrypted
chat; lv’F’Ns and encrypted ‘v'DIP. The speciﬁc instances cf these technclcgies
that can be explcited will be published in a separate Annexe (available tc
BULLRUN indcctrinated staff}.

T. In additicn tc the specific technclcgies that GCHQ cr its Sigint partners are able
to explcit; the methcds used tc achieve the explcitaticn must alsc be prctected.
These include suppcrt frcm cther crganisaticns, bcth internal and external tc
GCHQ. Access tc BULLRUN dces NUT imply any "need—tc—kncw" the details cf
scurces and methcds used tc achieve explcitaticn and, in general, there will be
NO "need—tc—kncw”. Requests fcr access to infcrmaticn cn scurces and methcds
shculd be sent tc UPC—SEC; if ccnsidered apprcpriate, this access may require
clearance fcr certain ECls.

B. BULLRUN material, data and details must be prctected with the use cf the
EULLRUN Gel and be marked with the label "BULLRUN," in additicn tc the
required privacy marking and ether descriptcrs. Use at the BULLRUN marking
is restricted to GCHQ and its Sigth 2"" Parties.

Access and Security

9. Requests for access tc the |Ccl must be spcnscred by a GCB cr abcve and must
be acccmpanied by a business case cutlining the "need—tc—kncw”. Access fcr
ccntractcrs will be limited and will require a strcng business case; such requests
shculd be discussed with the |Ccl Authcrity’s delegates befcre submissicn.
Requests for access are to be sent by email tc PTDAccesses.

1f]. Kncwledge cf BULLRUN infcrmaticn and access tc the BULLRUN |Ccl will cnly
be granted to indcctrinated individuals.

11. It is the respcnsibility cf spcnscrs (cr their successcrs} tc nctify UPC—SEC (via
PTDAccesses} when an individual nc lcnger require access to EULLRUN.

Handling Precedures

12. IIleners cf BULLRUN materials are respcnsible fcr ccrrectly marking the
infcrmaticn and fcr ensuring that it is handled acccrding tc guidelines fcr
prctecting classified cr CDI infcrmatjcn.

13. Repcrts derived frcm BULLRUN material shall nct reveal (cr imply} thatthe
scurce data was decrypted. The netwcrk ccmmunicaticn technclcgy that carried
the ccmmunicatjcn shculd nct be revealed.

14. Further disseminaljcn, cther than in prcduct repcrts, cf any data cr infcrmaticn

derived frcm BULLRUN data must be thcrcughly justified and receive pricr
apprcval frcm UPC—SEC.

:.I :: I‘llxu'I-Ei'liJih' I. .I:::.I:.::I :.|.:::I| -:';';I. :.  :. ;.:;.:: I'..':._-H:;-,  I  ' J' i' -='-': :-.: :: .. - ;_; . _. : .
TOP SECRET STRAPl COMINT

TOP SECRET STRAPl COMINT

15. All questions or concerns regarding BULLRUN material and information should
be directed to UPC—SEC.

Protective Marking Guidance

The following offers some guidance on Protective lvlarkings {PM} for BULLRUN
material. Questions regarding Plvls can be directed to the |Col Authority’s delegates.

At SECRET STRAPl CCMINT AUSCANZUKUS EYES :

The fact that GCHQ has unspecified capabilities against network security
technologies eg TLSi'SSL. HTTPS. SSH. VPNs. IPSec. NE capability does not
necessarily equate to decryption capability.

At TOP SECRET STRAPl CCMINT AUSCANZUKUS EYES :

The fact that GCHQ or its 2"“ Party partners has some capability againstthe

encryption used in a class or type of network communications technology. For
example. VPNs. IPSec. TSUSSL. HTTP S. SSH. encrypted chat. encrypted ‘v'olP.

At TOP SECRET STRAPZ CCMINT BULLRUN AUSCANZUKUS EYES :

The fact that GCHQ or a 2"“ Party partner has a capability against a speciﬁc
encrypted network security technology — see Annexe for details. (At a minimum.
specific capabilities may be protected by additional ECls and restriction on "Eyes".}

The fact that GCHQ or its partners exploits speciﬁc encrypted network
communications — see Annexe for details. (At a minimum. speciﬁc capabilities may
be protected by additional ECls and restriction on "Eyes".}

Decrypts (plaintext or derived events it metadata} obtain ed ﬁom BULLRUN
capabilities. (At a minimu m. speciﬁc capabilities may be protected by additional
restriction on "Eyes" and. in afew cases. additional ECIs.)

GLCSSARY

{U} HTTPS — HTTP trafﬁc secured inside an SSLl'TLS session. indicated by the
htIpszt'tIr URL. commonly using TCP port 443

{U} IPSEC -- IPSec. or IP Security. is the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETFJ
standard for layer 3 real—time communication security. IPSec allows two hosts for two
gateways} to establish a secure connection. sometimes called atunnel. All traffic is
protected at the network layer.

{U} SSH — Secure Shell. A common protocol used for secure remote computer
access

{U} SSL— Secure Sockets Layer. Commonly used to provide secure network
communication. Widely used on the internet to provide secure web browsing.
webmail. instant messaging. electronic commerce. etc.

3of4

 

:- 'Illx 'l --t.::- _::..:: -.I-: I - --

TOP SECRET STRAPl COMINT

TOP SECRET STRAPl COMINT

[U] TLS — Tran spcrt Layer Security. The fcllcw—cn tc SSL, SSLv3 and TLSvlﬂ are
nearly id entical.

[U] VcIP — ‘v'cice cver Internet Prctcccl. A general term fer the using IP netvvcrks tc
make vcice phcne calls. The applicaticn layer prctcccl can be standards—based (e.g.,
H.323, SIP}, cr prcprietary (e.g., Skype}.

[U] 'v'PN — Virtual Private Netwcrk. A private netwcrk that makes use cf the public
teleccmmunicaljcns infrastructure, maintaining privacy via the use cf a tunneling
prctcccl and security prccedures that typically include encrypticn. |Ccmmcn prctcccls
include IPSEC and PPTP.

1..  I‘llxu' |-:E'l-.=III' I. _-: -:.:.=:I :.|.I:III    I.  :  :I  —':: I  : " -=' " -='.'1 -. : ;; ._ . :: . . . .
TOP SECRET STRAPl COMINT

