TOP SECRET/lCOMINT/IREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL/l20320108

HAT

IDNAL

INFORMATION

ASSURANCE

RESEARCH

LABORATORY

 

 

 

“The EDGE”

National Information Assurance Research Laboratory (NIARL)
Science, Technology, and Personnel Highlights

 

 

 

(U) Message from the NIARL Director:

(U/fFOUO) Welcome to the September 2008 edition of the National
Information Assurance Research Laboratory (NIARL) newsletter. The
NIARL is designated as the R2 organization within the NSA Research
Directorate. NIARL/R2 is responsible for conducting and sponsoring
research in technologies and techniques needed to secure America‘s
future information systems. While breaking new ground is certainly
rewarding, the overall goal for this research and exploration is to
identify concepts and solutions to reduce the Information Assurance

(IA) risks facing our nation’s critical information systems.

(U/fFOUO) Within R2’s general IA research thrusts of Crypto—Math, IA Engineering, and

Defensive Computing,

there are specific “Focus Areas” dedicated to existing andfor

anticipated critical challenges and technical IA risks. Focus Areas encompass topics such as
Research Integration, High Confidence Software and Systems, Secure Wireless Multimedia,
and Security Enhanced Operating Environments. For a complete listing of R2 Focus Areas
please refer to the R2 website at

(U/fFOUO) In this iss

ue of The EDGE we examine the Research Integration Focus Area and

the associated IA research challenges of bringing research concepts together, providing
relevant mission context, and presenting IA approaches to customers and stakeholders. R223
leads the Research Integration Focus Area and is charged with shepherding IA concepts and
innovations into the research prototype and demonstration stage. Please see the article “T_he
Research Journey from Passion to Prototype” for a detailed discussion of this topic.

 

(U/fFOUO) I am sincereli interested in your feedback and suggestions, and I ask that you

email your comments to

R2 Office Manager, a_ We look

forward to hearing from you!

Derived From: NSAJCSSM 1—52
Dated: 20070108
Declassify On: 20320108

TOP SECRETI/COMINTI/REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZLI/20320108

TOP SECRET/iCOMINTi/REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL/i20320108

iii-itiii-iiii-it‘d”!in!!!in}!!!in!!!1H!!!1H!!!1H!!!iHMIlriii-*iri-iliri-iliri-ﬁﬁi-ﬁﬁiﬂlﬁi-ﬁﬁd
(U) Contents
(UIIFOUO) Information Sharinq Roadmap Initiative
(U) Summer Mathematics, R21, and the Director’s Summer Proqram
(UIIFOUO) Support for l54 Code Review
(UIIFOUO) Key Manaqement Modelinq Research
(U) The Research Journey from Passion to Prototype

(U) R222 Photonic Loqic Proqram Review at Sandia National
Laboratories

(UIIFOUO) Sandia Trip Hithiqhts R225’s Anti-Tamper Research Proqress

(UIIFOUO) R225IDepartment of Enerqy Enqaqement Yields Idaho
National Labs Research

(UIIFOUO) CLARIFYMIND Wireless Pilot Technical Exchanqe with
Canadian Representative

(UIIFOUO) R22 Continues Collaboration with NSA CTOITS via Secure
Tokens Talk

(U) R23 Supports Graduate Math Proqram Larqe Graph Research

(U) OpenSolaris‘m) FMAC: Brinqinq the Flask Mandatory Access Control
Architecture to OpenSolaris

(UIIFOUO) R23 Contributes Behavioral Anomaly Detection to IDAICCS
DISTILLERY SCAMP

 

(UIIFOUO) HAIRBALL Deploys GraphViz for POPEYESEAR: Visualization
Techniques for Computer Network Defense

(UIIFOUO) Personnel News

TOP SECRETI/COMINTI/REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZLI/20320108

TOP SECRET/fCOMINT/IREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL/l20320108

1'1“?ff"?TTTTTTT1"?TTTTTTT1“?TTTTTTT1“?TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT‘

(U) From the NIARL Technical Director’s Desk:

  
  

 (UIIFOUO) Information Sharing Roadmap Initiative

4 (U/IFOUO) Recently, I was asked to lead a small team, with
representation from across the Information Assurance Directorate (IAD),
the NSA/CSS Commercial Solutions Center (NCSC), and the Research
Directorate, to develop an IAD roadmap for information sharing.
Obviously, this is not the first time an Agency or organization has
developed a roadmap on this topic. For example, community roadmaps
- were developed by the Program Manager for Information Sharing
Environment (PM—ISE) at the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (Information
Sharing Environment Implementation Plan) and the Global Information Grid (GIG)
Information Assurance Portfolio (GIAP) management office (System Technology Evolution
Plan (STEP) for the Secure Information Exchange (SIE) thread of the GIG Information
Assurance Architecture). Unlike previous community efforts, this activity is focused on
developing an internal IAD information sharing roadmap.

(U/IFOUO) So why is an internal IAD information sharing roadmap needed? While there are
many reasons, the primary reasons are to provide a long term IAD vision for information
sharing that is common across the corporation, to provide a shared context (e.g. a corporate
description of information sharing and the necessary activities to achieve information
sharing), and to provide a tool to synchronize and anticipate individual IAD, NCSC and
Research activities related to information sharing. In a nutshell, this roadmap is intended to be
a starting point for harmonizing all IAD activities related to information sharing over an
extended timeframe (e.g. 5—7 years). Our goal is not to create a roadmap that competes with
existing community roadmaps. Our approach will be to synthesize existing community
roadmaps into an internal roadmap that drives IAD investments in information sharing.
Lastly, our roadmap will be a living document and will be revised as the timeline moves to
the right, or as IAD learns more about information sharing requirements.

iiiiiiiiiiﬁiiﬁiiitﬁ*iiﬂfﬂﬂfﬁﬂfﬁﬁfﬂﬁfﬂﬁfﬁﬁfﬁﬁfiﬁfiﬁfiﬁfffi

(U) Cryptic-Math Corner:

(UI/FOUO) For general information on R21 Cr to ra hic IA Research’s capabilities and
current efforts, please visit the R2 web site or the R21
homepage at link:

TOP SECRETI/COMINTI/REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, DELI/20320108

  
 

TOP SECRET/fCOMINT/IREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL/l20320108

(U) Summer Mathematics, R21, and the Director’s Summer Program

(U) The Director's Summer Program (DSP) is the agency‘s premier summer program for
mathematics undergraduates. Since its inception in 1990, the mission of the DSP has not been
simply recruitment, (though a small but steady percentage of DSP participants do come back
to work at NSA, often after obtaining an advanced degree), but rather an outreach effort
aimed at attracting the best mathematics students from around the country, educating them
about mathematics at NSA, and thus establishing ties with the future leaders of the outside
mathematics community.

(U/IFOUO) While the DSP is hosted by the Mathematics Research Group, the technical
directors come from across the Agency. In 2008 the technical directors were —
_, _(R21), and _(831223). This year’s 22 participants were
culled from 260 applicants. Over 12 weeks, students worked in small teams with NSA
mathematicians to develop real—world solutions to classified, operational problems.

(U/IFOUO) Over the years, R21 personnel have supported the DSP both as project mentors,
who propose a project and guide a small group of students (usually a 12—week, half—time
commitment), and as technical directors of the program, who select and interview the
students, find projects and mentors, and serve as general technical and administrative support
full—time during the summer (usually a 2—year, half—time commitment).

(UI/FOUO) This year, in addition to presenting their results to both the Director and De ut
Director of NSA, the DSP was invited to give classified presentations to ﬂ,

a professional staffer on the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (SSCI) as well as two
members of the SSCI Technical Advisory Group.

(Sf/SI/REL) Projects from DSP 2008 of possible interest to R2 include: RANDOMIZERS, a
study of open source randomizers, TUNDRA, research of a new statistic for codebook
analysis, and CLOUD, implementing graph algorithms in a cloud computing environment.
Short summaries follow.

(Sf/SI/IREL) RANDOMIZERS —— Because of their use in the generation of keying material,
randomizers play a critical role in modern cryptographic systems. The RANDOMIZERS
project focused on two popular commercial software randomizers: Open SSL‘s randomizer
and fdev/random. The DSP students researched the quality of these randomizers by
measuring entropy and by considering cryptanalytic attacks (e.g., Forward Security). The
students confirmed an outside attack on /dev/random, but they also showed that this attack is
not as strong as the outside paper claimed. They found no obvious weaknesses in Open SSL's
randomizer. Finally, the students examined a mixing component consisting of a shift register
with a contribution from an entropy source (modeled as Bernoulli——p bits). They determined a
theoretical bound on the number of register steps needed to reach full entropy given p and the

ol nomial driving the shift register. This project was supported by—and
h of 1735.

TOP SECRETI/COMINTI/REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, DELI/20320108

TOP SECRET/fCOMINT/IREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL/l20320108

(TS/ISI/IREL) TUNDRA —— Electronic codebooks, such as the Advanced Encryption
Standard, are both widely used and difficult to attack cryptanalytically. NSA has only a
handful of in—house techniques. The TUNDRA project investigated a potentially new
technique —— the Tau statistic —— to determine its usefulness in codebook analysis. This project
was supported by—of R21.

(Sf/Sl/IREL) CLOUD —— Cloud computing is a paradigm to perform massive computations in
parallel on a cluster of computers via a “map—reduce" model. The DSP students researched
how amenable cloud computing is to various graph algorithms. The team successfully
implemented the graph algorithms k—cores and k—trusses as well as two Agency contact
chaining algorithms, STARFIRE (developed by DSP 1999) and CARPAT, in the map——reduce
framework. Their research suggests most graph algorithms fit naturally in the framework.

Further, this framework su orts the ability to process larger data sets. This project was
supported bydof R1.

(U/IFOUO) This summer the students made good progress on these and five other projects. A
report detailing all of the work done will be published by R1 in the fall of 2008.

(UIIFOUO) POC: Dr. _ R211, —

(UIIFOUO) Support for I54 Code Review

(UI/FOUO) Earlier this yea_ Chief of 154, solicited volunteers to support a
DIRNSA and Director of IAD chartered review of approximately 100,000 lines of Ada 83
code. _forward deployed from R21 and serving as 1542 Technical Director,
enlisted R213 to provide support with automated software analysis tools.

(TS/lREL_ R213, led the automated analysis effort using the tool PolySpace
for Ada to analyze the code. PolySpace for Ada employs “abstract interpretation” to analyze
code for a variety of errors such as uninitialized variables, integer overflow, et cetera. The
initial automated analysis identified some non—standard software features requiring more
extensive examination. — then teamed with_ R213, to assist
with the analysis and provide results to — 1543. As noted by Mr. - the
automated code analysis discoveries provided “valuable” results, and complemented a parallel
154 manual code analysis effort by highlighting several items undiscovered by the manual
analysis team.

(TSI/REL) Analyzing and debugging software code on fielded systems is a time—consuming,
expensive operation. Using automated techniques to identify coding abnormalities and bugs
in system software prior to fielding reduces the overall cost of fixing software errors by an
order of magnitude and significantly increased the quality of the deployed software. To this
end, R213 continues to research the development of software environments and software
languages focused on integrating automated analysis within the design and development
stages of the software development lifecycle.

(UI/FOUO POCs: R213, (301—

R213,

TOP SECRETI/COMINTI/REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZLI/20320108

TOP SECRET/iCOMINT/IREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL/i20320108

(UIIFOUO) Key Management Modeling Research

(U/fFOUO) R21 is approaching two significant milestones in Key Management Modeling
(KMM) research. First, the researchers appear to have found a proof and analysis technology
that is robust enough to do meaningful formal analysis of real key management systems.
KMM is now making use of the Cryptographic Protocol Shapes Analyzer (CPSA) developed
under contract to R213. CPSA was designed to analyze cryptographic protocols so KMM is
now expressing key management systems as high—level protocols in order to apply CPSA.
The KMM researchers have been working with Mitre, and changes to CPSA have already
been made to enable it to be applied to KMM more directly.

(Cl/REL) Additionally, KMM is being used for the first time to model a real—world key
management system. The United Kingdom (UK) is designing a new key management
architecture as part of its Secure Management Infrastructure (SMI) effort. The initial UK
architecture is simple enough to make it a good candidate for modeling while still allowing
analysis to be accomplished on a real system. Furthermore, the UK has its own project to
produce a formal specification of the key management architecture in Z, which will provide
invaluable input to KMM. A draft model is currently under development, and if sufficient
progress is achieved, R21 will be presenting the results at the 5—Eyes Key Management
Strategy Group (KMSG) in Ottawa in October 2008.

iiiiI-iii-iiI-iirl-ﬁii-ﬁiii-1rill“!iii-1|Iii-1|ﬁﬁiﬁfiﬁfiﬁfiﬁffﬁffﬁffﬁfflif-
(U) IA Engineering Exchange:

(U/fFOUO) For general information on R22 IA Engineering Research’s capabilities and

current efforts, please visit the R2 web sit_ or use the R22

(U) The Research Journey from Passion to Prototype

(U/fFOUO) As noted in the NIARL Director’s introduction, Research Integration (R223) is
the NIARL Focus Area responsible for taking IA discoveries into the research prototype and
demonstration stage. Along the way, the team explores and addresses critical assurance
challenges facing our current information infrastructure, as well as those emerging against our
future systems.

(U/fFOUO) To explore the goals of Research Integration, let’s follow some distinct research

efforts from their origins toward the integrated prototype and demonstration stage. For this
example, we’ll use a well—understood assurance problem given our current operational

TOP SECRETI/COMINTI/REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZLI/20320108

TOP SECRET/fCOMINT/IREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL/l20320108

environment of multiple networks at various security levels — namely, the need for users to
access multiple systems (also known as domains) in a secure way.

(U/IFOUO) The central purpose of most research is to explore what’s “next.” Instead of a
known desired end-state, this process often begins with a question, such as “are there better
approaches to secure software?” - many ideas are then tested to try to find the answer. That
particular question remains central to R213 High Confidence Software and Systems (HCSS)
Focus Area research into how Formal Methods and mathematical proofs could ensure the
“correctness” of software design. In this example, the HCSS team explored possible solutions
and eventually developed a small-scale, Java-based proof-of-concept.

(U/IFOUO) Meanwhile, in other areas of NIARL, another question was being asked within
the Authentication team, “how can commercial smart card technologies be leveraged to
provide assured identity for access to sensitive systems?” Over the years, smart cards (and
smart card chipsets) rapidly progressed from their origins storing monetary value for
European pay phones, to then becoming unique identifiers for mobile phones, and ultimately
finding use as personal identification (and even DoD user authentication for unclassified
systems). As the technology evolved, IA research explored approaches to leverage these
technologies toward our goals. But that sparked other questions, such as “what do we do
about software from unknown or risky sources?”

(U/IFOUO) The “a-ha!” moment came from a convergence of these two problem sets
courtesy of the Java Card standard for smart cards. Could Formal Methods lead to a proven
Java-based operating system and provide assurance for commercially-based smart cards? In
partnership with HCS S, Research Integration took the Formal Methods proof-of-concept
approach and applied it to the real-world smart card problem. The lofty goal? Assured (and
unclassified) multi-domain tokens for community identity and authentication.

(U/IFOUO) The resulting Tokens Assurance Software research within Research Integration
just completed the prototype of a functional and mathematically proven Java Card operating
system. In addition, these software assurance techniques were expanded to develop tools to
create assured applets to run on the cards. We will also soon complete some advanced
hardware prototypes featuring physical protection concepts which will further demonstrate the
“integrated” potential for how to provide strong authentication for access to critical systems.

(U/IFOUO) To extend the concept, Research Integration will leverage additional NIARL
exploration into yet another pressing IA research question, “how can virtualization
technologies provide the foundation for future trusted computing platforms?” In partnership
with fellow Focus Areas, Research Integration is prototyping early versions of these
approaches to investigate how they could enable assured information sharing, authentication
and access control, as well as mobility for users. In this way, the initial breakthroughs of
software assurance, secure tokens, and platform trust could start to create answers to real
operational questions, such as “How can we transform the way user identity is protected to
enable cross-community collaboration?”

TOP SECRETI/COMINTI/REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZLI/20320108

TOP SECRET/fCOMINT/IREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL/l20320108

(UI/FOUO) So while “passion” for IA discovery is not unique to Research Integration, our
objective is to put these advanced technologies into a form that highlights their potential to
address significant assurance questions. No matter the origin, the potential technology
solutions that emerge from IA research are designed for significant breakthrough. However, a
particular innovation, in and of itself, provides limited benefit unless it can advance the
science, solve a problem, and ultimately reach customers. The aim of the R223 Research
Integration team is to reach those customers and showcase the potential for NIARL research
to become a decisive advantage against network adversaries. Please contact us if you would
like to learn more about our research efforts and see our latest creations.

(U/I’FOUO) Poe: —chief R223,—

(U) R222 Photonic Logic Program Review at Sandia National
Laboratories

(U/IFOUO) From 19—21 August 2008_and —of R22, and _

all of R222, attended an annual
review at Sandia National Laboratories to assess progress and provide direction to Sandia on
two multi—year photonic logic R&D projects aimed at performing all—optical Boolean logic at
IOOGbps clock cycles or faster.

(U/IFOUO) The first photonic logic technology is based on a Photodiode Electro—Absorption
Modulator (PD—EAM). Recent accomplishments include the design and fabrication of an
optical AND gate, prediction via detailed models of >IOOGHZ switching speeds,
demonstration of a proof of concept multi—element AND gate at MHz frequencies, and
demonstration of low contrast, >2OGHZ optical modulation of a PD—EAM pair. A near—term
challenge is the demonstration of an optical logic gate operating at 10+GHz switching.

(U/IFOUO) The second effort is the Extremely Shallow Quantum Well Symmetric Self
Electro—Optic Effect Device (E SQW—S—SEED, or SEED). Sandia has successfully fabricated
and tested a SEED interconnect, fabricated by diamond turning a moldable plastic. This
interconnect, with anti—reflection coatings, is predicted to attain close to 95% throughput. A
4OGb/s SEED toggle was also reported, but not yet cascaded. A physical model for SEED
switching was devised and initial results suggest that the optical power for reliable cascade
may be 2—5): higher than anticipated.

(UI/FOUO) The critical milestone (2Q FY10) for these technologies is the successful
demonstration of a 3—bit 40Gb/s Linear Feedback Shift Register (LFSR) research prototype.
This demonstration of Small—Scale Integration (SSI) should provide sufficient data to enable
an assessment of the scalability and ultimate clock rate of the technologies. The majority of
this work is performed in Sandia's Microsystems and Engineering Science Applications
(MESA) facility, expected to gain certification soon by the Trusted Access Program Office
(TAPO).

TOP SECRETI/COMINTI/REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZLI/20320108

TOP SECRET/fCOMINT/IREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL/l20320108

(UIIFOUO) POC: _ R222,—

(UIIFOUO) Sandia Trip Highlights R225’s Anti-Tamper Research Progress

(Sf/REL) Use of commercial components in a high assurance solution for national security
applications will require physical protection mechanisms. In the past, with government built
solutions, anti—tamper was part of the design and manufacture process. Today, use of COTS
will require the government to apply these protections after production. R225’s Intelligent
Reaction Anti—Tamper (AT) research program showcased the ability to provide these physical
protection mechanisms at a recent program review at Sandia National Laboratories.

(Sf/REL) Several key technologies were demonstrated:
0 Multi—layer conformal AT on printed circuit boards with integrated control logic;
0 iPhones with hard aftermarket device encapsulation; and
0 Chip packages retrofitted with active anti—tamper capability, including internal power.

(Sf/REL) Remaining FY08 research into conformal AT technology will support R223’s
secure token effort. Starting in FY09, 1823 will assume full responsibility for further
development of this AT technology as a part of R225’s partnerships forged to realize a full
life cycle: from research through implementation. R225 and I823 are working together to
advance the aftermarket device encapsulation technology to the same level of technical
readiness, with SID’s NUCLEARWINTER team as a potential initial customer. R225 will
continue research on the modified chip packaging technology in FY09, and will work with
IAD to identify potential end—users.

: an ,
UI/FOUO POC (1 R225

(UIIFOUO) R225IDepartment of Energy Engagement Yields Idaho
National Labs Research

(Sf/REL) Researchers from Idaho National Labs (INL) visited NSA on 26 August 2008 to
demonstrate INL progress on research into secure erasure for commercial memory modules.
INL is moving towards a method of retrofit zeroization capability for synchronous dynamic
random access memory (SDRAM) in commercial desktops, with an initial prototype expected
by the end of FY08. This work is similar to R225’s Adaptive Zeroization research, but trades
greatly reduced applicability and scope for lower risk. Personnel from R225, IAD’s
Microelectronics Anti—Tamper Solutions Branch (18231), and IAD’s Cryptographic Engines,
Modules, and Tokens Division (I853) participated in the discussion. This research was
sponsored by R225, and funded by the Department of Energy’s 2008 Applied Technologies
Program. R225 is beginning discussions with its IAD partners to determine the best way to
move forward with integrating INL’s work into NSA’s future anti—tamper mission.

(UIIFOUO) POC: — R225,—

TOP SECRETI/COMINTI/REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZLI/20320108

TOP SECRET/fCOMINT/IREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL/l20320108

(UIIFOUO) CLARIFYMIND Wireless Pilot Technical Exchange with
Canadian Representative

(U/IFOUO) — and-of the R224
CLARIFYMIND Wireless Pilot Team met with of Canadian Security

Establishment Canada (CSEC) who is currently assigned to the Canadian Liaison Office at
NSA. The meeting was a follow up to _ May 2008 CLARIFYMIND presentation
to the 5 Eyes Information Assurance Research Conference at NSA. -described the new
CSEC building under construction, the need for wireless communications in the facility, and
the CSEC efforts underway to consider various wireless solutions. The R224 team briefed

on the CLARIFYMIND wireless pilot, current research efforts, and planned future
activities-was very interested in considering CLARIFYMIND as a potential pilot
application. He plans to share the CLARIFYMIND potential pilot partner information with
CSEC decision—makers and then schedule a follow—up technical exchange with the R224
Team.

(UIIFOUO) POC:— R224, —

(UIIFOUO) R22 Continues Collaboration with NSA CTOITS via Secure
Tokens Talk

(U/IFOUO) The Information Assurance Engineering Research Office (R22) is continuing a
collaboration initiative with the NSAJCTO Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) and
Chief Information Officer (CIO) Staff (TS) through an exchange of ideas via TS—sponsored
technical talks. R22’s objective is to assist TS with improving the security of critical IT
systems as well as obtaining feedback and information on emerging hard problems to consider
for future research. In addition, the regular exchange with TS helps connect R22 researchers
to a potential new base of customers and partners.

(UI/FOUO)_ the R223 lead researcher for secure tokens discovery, presented on
8 August 2008 at the TS Technical Talk Forum. His discussion centered on the Tokens
Research Roadmap, the current status of development efforts underway through partnerships
with IAD, and current utilization of interim capabilities on CES laptops. TS personnel and
other Agency representatives who deal with tokens/smartcards responded positively and
launched a dialogue on many issues that encompassed operations, policy, technical transfer,
and productization challenges. While there were different implementation issues raised for a
variety of customer sets, the common end vision is an assured identity token in a smartcard
format. The R223 token research program is in line with this vision and all capabilities will
be compatible and can be transferred onto a smartcard format. Both DOD and IC customer
needs are addressed as a part of the R223—led research strategy.

wove Poe: 22,—

10

TOP SECRETI/COMINTI/REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZLI/20320108

TOP SECRET/fCOMINT/IREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL/l20320108

'1'1'?‘"ff'ff?'f'ff'ff'Tff?'1'1'?"fff'ff'ff'ff'ff'ff'ff'

(U) Defense Computing Bytes:

(U/IFOUO) For general information on R23 Defense Com
capabilities and current efforts

 
 
 

(U) R23 Supports Graduate Math Program Large Graph Research

(U/IFOUO) For 12 weeks over the summer of 2008 the Graduate Math Program (GMP)1
participants wrestled, wrangled, quantified and processed more than 20063 of network traffic
metadata generated by R23’s FLOWBEE project. FLOWBEE is a spin—off of the POPQUIZ
project, which collects network metadata on high bandwidth protocols such as HTTP, SMTP,
and DNS. FLOWBEE uses novel techniques to efficiently recognize and discard duplicate
relations, significantly reducing the volume of saved data. This data reduction, in
combination with the highly efficient POPQUIZ2 processing framework, allows FLOWBEE
to collect metadata for every session on high—speed links.

(U/IFOUO) This rich and varied dataset provided fertile ground for their explorations in large
graph analysis and characterization. Led by Technical Directors from R1 and R6, participants
focused on finding malicious activity in the data, modeling graphs produced by the
FLOWBEE data, and investigating high—performance computing architectures to determine
their applicability to processing FLOWBEE data and related large graph problems.

(U/IFOUO) As the problem supporters for GMP, R23’s DIO team provided data, loaded and
indexed the data in a MySQL database, and installed the FLOWBEE Surf web interface in the
GMP’s lab. R23 also provided training and consulting on the FLOWBEE data and associated
processing tools, presented findings from prior research, and participated in workshop and
brainstorming sessions during the course of the summer. On 31 July 2008, the GMP and R2
DIO team members presented their findings to DIRNSA and D/DIRNSA.

(U/IFOUO) This summer’s GMP work resulted in numerous improved capabilities that have
been incorporated into existing R23 technology. The big wins from this activity were:
0 A new algorithm for detecting web spam, which found confirmed new malicious hosts

0 An improved BadRank algorithm for rating the badness of a host based on its
connections

 

l (UHFOUO) GMP is a competitive 12-week summer program run by R1. It provides an opportunity for
exceptional mathematics graduate students to work directly with NSA mathematicians on mission-critical
problems and experience the excitement of the NSA mathematics community.

2 (UHFOUO) See July 2008 EDGE Newsletter for additional information on POPQUIZ.
11

TOP SECRETI/COMINTI/REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZLI/20320108

TOP SECRET/fCOMINT/IREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL/l20320108

0 An improved random forest classifier to detect malicious hosts, which found
confirmed new malicious hosts

0 An implementation of BadRank for the Cray XMT

o A Hadoop MapReduce implementation of PageRank

0 New insights into the strengths, weaknesses, and scalability of the KronFit graph
generation algorithm, including new proofs of several properties

(U) OpenSolarisUM’ FMAC: Bringing the Flask Mandatory Access
Controls Architecture to OpenSolaris

(U) Flexible Mandatory Access Control (FMAC) for OpenSolarisaM) is a joint NSA and Sun
Microsystems Inc. project to add the Flask architecture to the OpenSolaris operating system.
The Flask architecture provides flexible support for a wide range of security policies, enabling
integration of different policy engines and the configuration of the security policy to meet the
specific security goals for a variety of computing environments. The flexible mandatory
access controls supported by the Flask architecture enable the confinement of flawed and
malicious applications and the enforcement of confidentiality, integrity, least privilege, and
assured invocation goals. The Flask architecture has been successfully applied to several
other operating systems via the SELinux, SEBSD, and SEDarwin projects as well as to other
software components such as hypervisors (Xen), windowing systems (X), and database
systems (PostgreSQL).

(U) The initial FMAC code base was contributed by the NSA to OpenSolaris based on a
version of the Flask code that predated any involvement by the Linux community. This code
was then integrated into the OpenSolaris code and adapted by— a Sun engineer
who is the co—lead of the FMAC project. This code was first released publicly on the FMAC
project web site in May 2008. When built, it produced a policy compiler and a kernel capable
of loading the resulting policy into the security server.

(U) Since that first release, joint development by the NSA and by Sun Microsystems has
proceeded rapidly. Support for new system calls was introduced in June 2008, and support
for labeling processes was introduced in July 2008. Several utilities have been created for
controlling and interacting with the system. Current design and implementation discussions
are focusing on how to best support file security labeling in OpenSolaris, particularly for the
ZFS filesystem. Once file labeling is supported, the next steps will include support for
domain transitions and permission checks on process and file operations. This will provide a
base capability that can be used both to demonstrate the benefits of Flask and to further
develop the remaining support for object labeling and mandatory controls.

(wove) 1m—

12

TOP SECRETI/COMINTI/REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, DELI/20320108

TOP SECRET/fCOMINT/IREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL/l20320108

(UIIFOUO) R23 Contributes Behavioral Anomaly Detection to IDAICCS
DISTILLERY SCAMP

(TSI/SI/IREL) The 2008 Summer Conference on Applied Mathematical Problems (SCAMP)
was hosted this summer in Bowie, MD at the IDAICCS. This SCAMP focused on a specific
category of attacks and intrusions targeted against US. critical national infrastructure.
Commonly known in the DoD community as the BYZANTINE HADES (BH) attacks, these
intrusions are believed to originate from the People’s Republic of China. The main goals of
the SCAMP were to define and implement novel behavioral-based techniques that could
better detect and respond to the wide array of BH attacks. R23’s POPQUIZ framework
provided the analytical applications to identify behavioral anomalies while DISTILLERY
provided the stream-based platform from which to execute these applications.

(U/IFOUO) A key factor to the success of the SCAMP was the availability of the SPADE
programming language. Developed by IBM, SPADE enables the rapid development and
prototyping of distributed stream-processing applications. Utilizing this language requires
little programming expertise, as applications are described using high-level stream-centric
constructs. A compiler handles the conversion of this description into native DISTILLERY
application. The SCAMP participants, the majority having had little experience developing
DISTILLERY applications, were able to quickly compose unique and complex applications.
By not having to expend time learning a new low-level API, participants were able to focus
their efforts on defining and implementing new detection techniques and methodologies.

(Uh/Few) 1300— R23, —

(UIIFOUO) HAIRBALL Deploys GraphViz for POPEYESEAR: Visualization
Techniques for Computer Network Defense

(UI/FOUO) On 12 August 2008 the R23 HAIRBALL project deployed its GraphViz v1.0
visualization tool to the NTOC floor as an addition to the POPEYESEAR interface.
Following the deployment of TreeViz in Nov 2007, GraphViz is the second visualization tool
deployed for operational use. The achievement reflects the ongoing research investment in
new visualization techniques uniquely designed to support exploration and analysis of
Computer Network Defense (CND) data.

(UI/FOUO) GraphViz displays relationships from POPEYESEAR data as an interactive graph
with dynamic, analyst-directed navigation. The dynamic navigation empowers analysts to
locate subsets of the large POPEYESEAR database that are most relevant to their analysis.
The graph-based display enables analysts to more easily perceive the connections existing in
the data.

(UI/FOUO) GraphViz has been built with an eye towards usability and rapid response. The
interface provides Coogle-like search syntax and intuitive point-and-click control. Under the
hood, the use of data preprocessing and indexing enables GraphViz to return results with

13

TOP SECRETI/COMINTI/REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZLI/20320108

TOP SECRET/fCOMINT/IREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL/l20320108

minimal wait time for the analyst. CraphViz is a Java application and uses Renoir as its
graphing engine. As an added component of the POPEYESEAR interface, CraphViz is
accessible to all NTOC operational analysts via the CROUPDIVE/BLUESASH network.

(U/xrouo) Poo—R23—

'1'"'1'???"'1'"'1'???"'1'"'1'???"'1'"'TT'TT'TT'TT'TT'TT'TT'T'

(Ul/FOUO) Personnel News

(U/IFOUO) Visiting Researchers in R21:

0 (U/IFOUO) Recent arrivals in R21 include—of the Cryptologic
Mathematician Program, who will be conducting research in Elliptic Curves, an
of the Applied Mathematics Program, who will be conducting research in
Quantum Computing. In addition, _Topielec of the Cryptanalysis
Development Program will be arriving soon to begin conducting research in
Cryptographic Hash Functions.

0 (UI/FOUO) At any given time, R21 typically hosts between 5 and 10 visiting
researchers, mostly participants in the various math development programs at the
Agency. These 6 to 9 month tours are a staple of the development program experience,
and are coordinated through the R21 “intern czar"— Persons interested in
learning more about tour opportunities in R21 should contact-directly to get an
overview of the office and to learn about currently available projects. (POC: —

—R213,

(U/IFOUO) Hail to R22 Newcomers:

o (U/fFOUO_ SNIP (System and Network Interdisciplinary Program)-

of 2011, will join R224: Secure Wireless Multimedia Focus Area, for a tour, starting
Sept 15. Justin will be working on CLARIFYMIND—TS, specifically looking at
available entropy sources, plus how to gather and provide them to the Random
Number Generator within the CM—TS architecture. R21’s draft paper entitled A
Preliminary Architecture for a Software Randomizer for CM-TS will provide the

basis for—work. (Poe:—

0 (U/IFOUO)— recently joined R222 as a Lead Researcher after completing
a PCS at GCHQ. A mathematician from the CMP class of 2000,.brings a wide
variety of relevant hardware and software experience across a range of projects,
encompassing Field Programmable Gate Array (FPCA) design, error correcting codes,
high speed synchronization techniques and protocols to name a few. Throughout his
career, .has won high regard as a leader and a mentor. -is a member of the
High Speed Electronics team, where his initial focus will be on emerging

technologies. 

(U/IFOUO) Visiting Researchers in R23:
14

TOP SECRETI/COMINTI/REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZLI/20320108

TOP SECRET/fCOMINT/IREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL/l20320108

  
 
 

(UI/FOUO)—an IDA/CCS Contractor an both SNIP interns
will be joining the D10 team, beginning 2 September 2008. will be
focused on developing new characterizations and methods for POPQUIZ. Both were
recently part of the DISTILLERY SCAMP and plan on a 6 to 9 month tour to learn

and to contribute to the D10 mission. (POC: —
-)

ﬁfﬁiiiihiiihiiihii*iri*iri*iri*iri*iri*iriiﬁiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii

TOP SECRETI/COMINTI/REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZLI/20320108

15

