HOME PAGE TODAY‘S PAPER VIDEO MOST POPULAR U.S.Edition SubscribeIDigitaI/Home Delivery Log In RegisterNOW Help

an. New Hark an!” U S Search All NYTimes.com II

WORLD U.S. N.Y./REGION BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY SCIENCE HEALTH SPORTS OPINION ARTS STYLE TRAVEL JOBS REAL ESTATE AUTOS

 

POLITICS EDUCATION TEXAS

Advertisement

Published: September 5, 2013 FACEBOOK TWITTER GOOGLE+ E-MAIL SHARE

Secret Documents Reveal N.S.A. Campaign Against Encryption

Documents show that the N.S.A. has been waging a war against encryption using a battery of methods that include working
with industry to weaken encryption standards, making design changes to cryptographic software, and pushing international

encryption standards it knows it can break. Related Article »

Excerpt from 2013 Intelligence Budget Request Bullrun Briefing Sheet

When British analysts were cleared for the Bullrun program, they were given this briefing sheet outlining the sensitivities
of the program, including the N.S.A.'s speciﬁc capabilities against widely used Internet encryption technologies.

BULLRUN Col — Briefing Sheet
Introduction

1. The ability to exploit targets’ encrypted communications is extremely fragile Penetrating Target Defences is the code-cracking group
and is often enabled through sensitive ECI programmes. The need to take Within Britain's Government communications
I I I I I Headquarters, or GCHQ.
additional measures to protect that capability has long been recognised.
Currently, virtually all decryption is carried out by PTD (ARTHUR) processing
with decrypts going to the IIB in the NOCON Col; some decrypts are placed
in the ENDUE Col due to the sensitivity or fragility of the exploitation
capability.

2. In recent years there has been an aggressive effort, lead by NSA, to make In 2000, the N.S.A. mounted a full-scale effort to preserve
major improvements in defeating network security and privacy involving 
multiple sources and methods, all of which are extremely sensitive and collaborating with technology companies in the United
fragile. These include: Computer Network Exploitation (CNE); collaboration States and abroad 1° bui'd access Points "‘10 the"

with other Intelligence Agencies; investment in high-performance computers; prOdUds'

and development of advanced mathematical techniques. Several ECI

compartments may apply to the specific sources, methods, and techniques

involved.

3. Making the best use of these new capabilities requires that decryption Three years ago, the N.S.A. gained the capability to
processing be widely deployed beyond PTD and the results of that decryptvastamoums OfSCramb'ed '“teme‘da‘a-
processing be available to a wide range of analysts. This inevitably makes it

harder to protect this sensitive and fragile capability and we need to

counterbalance this by introducing measures to control access to this

material and heighten awareness ofthe sensitivities amongst those who have

access.

 

4. To achieve this, NSA has introduced the BULLRUN Col to protect our
abilities to defeat the encryption used in network communication
technologies. This covers both the “fact of" a capability against a specific
technology and resulting decrypts (which may be either plaintext or metadata
(events). GCHQ is also introducing BULLRUN. (CSEC, BSD and GCSB are
expected to do likewise.)

Control Authority

5. The BULLRUN Col is owned by -— for Penetrating Target Defences
(PTD). Authority to manage the Col is delegated to _ (currently
_ )and - ( - ,currently - ).

BULLRUN Sensitivity and Coverage

6. It is imperative to protect the fact that GCHQ, NSA and their Sigint partners
have capabilities against specific network security technologies as well as the
number and scope of successes. These capabilities are among the Sigint
community’s most fragile, and the inadvertent disclosure of the simple “fact
of" could alert the adversary and result in immediate loss of the capability.
Consequently, any admission of “fact of" a capability to defeat encryption
used in specific network communication technologies or disclosure of details
relating to that capability must be protected by the BULLRUN COl and
restricted to those specifically indoctrinated for BULLRUN. The various types
of security covered by BULLRUN include, but are not limited to, TLS/SSL,
https (e.g. webmail), SSH, encrypted chat, VPNs and encrypted VOIP. The
specific instances ofthese technologies that can be exploited will be
published in a separate Annexe (available to BULLRUN indoctrinated staff).

7. In addition to the specific technologies that GCHQ or its Sigint partners are
able to exploit, the methods used to achieve the exploitation must also be
protected. These include support from other organisations, both internal and
external to GCHQ. Access to BULLRUN does NOT imply any “need-to-know"
the details of sources and methods used to achieve exploitation and, in
general, there will be NO “need-to-know". Requests for access to information
on sources and methods should be sent to OPC-SEC; if considered
appropriate, this access may require clearance for certain ECls.

8. BULLRUN material, data, and details must be protected with the use of the
BULLRUN Col and be marked with the label “BULLRUN,” in addition to the
required privacy marking and other descriptors. Use ofthe BULLRUN marking
is restricted to GCHQ and its Sigint 2nd Parties.

Access and Security

9. Requests for access to the Col must be sponsored by a GC8 or above and
must be accompanied by a business case outlining the “need-to-know".
Access for contractors will be limited and will require a strong business case;
such requests should be discussed with the Col Authority’s delegates before
submission. Requests for access are to be sent by email to PTDAccesses.

10. Knowledge of BULLRUN information and access to the BULLRUN Col will
only be granted to indoctrinated individuals.

11. It is the responsibility of sponsors (ortheir successors) to notify _-
when an individual no longer require access to BULLRUN.

Handling Procedures

The full extent of the N.S.A.’s decoding capabilities is
known only to a limited group of top analysts from the
N.S.A. and its counterparts in Britain, Canada, Australia
and New Zealand (the so-called Five Eyes group). Only
they are cleared for the Bullrun program, the successorto
one called Manassas — both names of American Civil
War battles. The corresponding counterencryption
program at GCHQ is Edgehill, named for the ﬁrst battle of
the English Civil War.

The agency has circumvented or cracked much ofthe
encryption that guards global commerce and banking
systems, protects sensitive data like trade secrets and
medical records, and automatically secures basic Internet
communications, including the e-mails, Web searches,
Internet chats and phone calls of millions of Americans
and others around the world.

Unlike some classiﬁed information that can be parceled
out on a strict “need to know" basis, the Bullrun program
is so secret that, in general, there will be no need to
know.

Only a small cadre of contractors were allowed to join
Bullrun. It does not appear that Edward J. Snowden had
access, but he managed to gain access to dozens of
classiﬁed documents mentioning Bullrun.

 

12. Owners of BULLRUN materials are responsible for correctly marking the
information and for ensuring that it is handled according to guidelines for
protecting classified or COI information.

13. Reports derived from BULLRUN material shall not reveal (or imply) that
the source data was decrypted. The network communication technology that
carried the communication should not be revealed.

14. Further dissemination, otherthan in product reports, of any data or
information derived from BULLRUN data must be thoroughly justified and
receive prior approval from _ .

15. All questions or concerns regarding BULLRUN material and information
should be directed to —- .

Protective Marking Guidance

The following offers some guidance on Protective Markings (PM) for
BULLRUN material. Questions regarding PMs can be directed to the Col
Authority’s delegates.

At SECRET STRAP1 COMINT AUSCANZUKUS EYES :

The fact that GCHQ has unspecified capabilities against network security
technologies eg TLS/SSL, HTTPS, SSH, VPNs, lPSec. NB capability does not
necessarily equate to decryption capability.

At TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT AUSCANZUKUS EYES :

The fact that GCHQ or its 2nd Party partners has some capability against the
encryption used in a class ortype of network communications technology. For
example, VPNs, lPSec, TSL/SSL, HTTPS, SSH, encrypted chat, encrypted
VoIP.

At TOP SECRET STRAPZ COMINT BULLRUN AUSCANZUKUS EYES :

The fact that GCHQ or a 2nd Party partner has a capability against a specific
encrypted network security technology — see Annexe for details. (At a
minimum, specific capabilities may be protected by additional ECls and
restriction on “Eyes”.)

The fact that GCHQ or its partners exploits specific encrypted network
communications — see Annexe for details. (At a minimum, specific capabilities
may be protected by additional ECls and restriction on “Eyes”.)

Decrypts (plaintext or derived events / metadata) obtained from BULLRUN
capabilities. (At a minimum, specific capabilities may be protected by
additional restriction on “Eyes” and, in a few cases, additional ECls.)

GLOSSARY

(U) HTTPS — HTTP traffic secured inside an SSL/TLS session, indicated by
the https:// URL, commonly using TCP port 443

(U) lPSEC -- lPSec, or IP Security, is the Internet Engineering Task Force

(lETF) standard for layer 3 real-time communication security. lPSec allows
two hosts (or two gateways) to establish a secure connection, sometimes

called a tunnel. All traffic is protected at the network layer.

AUSCANZUKUS EYES stands for Australia, Canada,
New Zealand, United Kingdom and United States, i.e.,
Five Eyes.

 

(U) SSH — Secure Shell. A common protocol used for secure remote
computer access

(U) SSL — Secure Sockets Layer. Commonly used to provide secure network
communication. Widely used on the internet to provide secure web browsing,
webmail, instant messaging, electronic commerce, etc.

(U) TLS — Transport Layer Security. The follow-on to SSL, SSL\/3 and TLSv1.0
are nearly identical.

(U) VolP — Voice over Internet Protocol. A general term for the using IP
networks to make voice phone calls. The application layer protocol can be
standards-based (e.g., H.323, SIP), or proprietary (e.g., Skype).

(U) VPN — Virtual Private Network. A private network that makes use of the
public telecommunications infrastructure, maintaining privacy via the use of a
tunneling protocol and security procedures that typically include encryption.
Common protocols include lPSEC and PPTP.

 

©2013 The New York Times Company Site Map Privacy Your Ad Choices Advertise Terms of Sale Terms of Service Work Vlﬁth Us RSS Help Contact Us
Site Feed back

 

