Edition: US Sign in Mobile About us Subscribe

This site uses cookies. By continuing to browse the site you are agreeing to our use of cookies. Find 0
more here

 

the-guardian | [UK and World news Search
News US World Sports Comment Culture Business Money Environment Science
Travel Tech Media Life & style Data

News

World news
NSA

NSA inspector general report on :2: 3::
email and internet data collection

under Stellar Wind — full document

Top-secret draft report from 2009 by the NSA's inspector
general shows development of 'Collection of bqu internet
metadata' under program launched under Bush

0 NSA collected US email records in bulk for more than two
years under Obama

guardian.co.uk, Thursday 27 June 2013 11.01 EDT

[3

To print the document, click the "Original Document" link to open the original PDF. W

At this time it is not possible to print the document with annotations.  ' w
fllﬁ - Obama

w -
United States -
W

security

Law
Fisa court

More on this
story

NSA collected
M
W

 

TOP SE CRE T //S TL WJ/COMINT/ORCONWDFORN

S 7109-0002 WORKING DRAFT
OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL

 

NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY
CENTRAL SECURITY SERVICE
24 March 2009
(U) TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. (U) INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ ..1
II. REVIEW CATEGORIES ...................................................................................... ..3

(U) APPENDIX A: About the Review

(U) APPENDIX B: Presidential Authorizations

(U) APPENDIX C: Timeline of Key Events

(U) APPENDIX D: NSA Legal Review of the Presidential Authorization

(U) APPENDIX E: Flowchart of Metadata Analysis

(U) APPENDIX F: Flowchart of Content Analysis

(U) APPENDIX G: Security Clearances for President’s Sumeillance Program

(U) APPENDIX H: NSA Office of the Inspector General Reports on President’s
Surveillance Program

WORKING DRAFT

TOP SE CRE T /./S TL (IV/COMINT/ORCON/WOFORN

TOP SE CRE T MS TL WA’COMIN T /0R C ON/W 0F URN

WORKING DRAFT

TOP SE CRE TIKS' T L Wf/COMINTJ’ORCON/NOFORN

ii

Backround

TOP SECRET/XS TL W//C OMIN T /0R CONW 0F ORN

S1109-0002 WORKING DRAFT

I. (U) INTRODUCTION

 

(U) This Report

(UJ/FOUO) On 4 October 2001, President George W. Bush issued a
memorandum entitled “AUTHORIZATION FOR SPECIFIED
ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE ACTIVITIES DURING A LIMITED
PERIOD TO DETECT AND PREVENT ACTS OF TERRORISM
WITHIN THE UNITED STATES.” The memorandum was based on the
President’s determination that aﬁer the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks
in the United States, an extraordinary emergency existed for national
defense purposes.

(TS/ISI/J’ORJNF) The 4 October 2001 Presidential authorization delegated
authority to the Secretary of Defense, who further delegated it to the
Director of National Securitv A 'enc lChief. Central Securitv Service
ENSNQiCSSJ to conduct speciﬁed electronic surveillance on targets
related to Afghanistan and international terrorism for 30 days. Because the
surveillance included wire and cable communications carried into or out of
the United States, it would otherwise have required FISC authority.

   

(TS/fSIf/OR/NF) The Authorization speciﬁed that NSA could acquire the
content and associated metadata of telephony and Internet cemmunications
for which there was probable cause to believe that one of the
communicants was in Afghanistan or that one communicant was engaged
in or preparing for acts of international terroriSm. In addition, NSA was
authorized to acquire telephony and Internet nrletadata1 for communicatiOns
with at least one communicant outside the United States or for which no
communicant was known to be a citizen of the United States. NSA was
also allowed to retain, process, analyze and disseminate intelligence from
the communications acquired under the authority. 3

 

(Uf/FOUO) This report provides the classiﬁed reSults of the NSA Ofﬁce of
the Inspector General (DIG) review of the President’s Surveillance
Program (PSP) as mandated in the FISA Amendments Act (FAA) of 2008.
It includes the facts necessary to describe from NSA’s perspective:

' (U)Metadata is data that describes content, events, or networks associated with SIGI'NT targets.
2 (U)'1‘he Authority changed over time. See Appendix B for details.

WORKING DRAFT

T 01’ SECRET/VS TL W/lCOMINT/ORCONWOFORN

TOP SECRET/A511 W/VCOMINT/ORCON/NOFORN

S1109-0002
WORKING DRAFT

establishment of the PSP (Section One)
m implementation and product of the PSP (Section Two)

[El access to legal reviews of the PSP and access to information about
the PSP (Section Three)

[2] interaction with the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC)
and transition to ecurt orders related to the PSP (Section Four)

E oversight of PSP activities at NSA (Section Five)

(U) President's Surveillance Program Terminology

 

(Uf/FOUO) For purposes of this report, the PSP, or “the Program,” refers
to NSA activities conducted under the authority of the 4 October 2001
memorandum and subsequent renewals, hereafter known as “the
Authorization.” As mandated by the FAA, this review includes activities
authorized by the President between ll September 200] and 17 January
2007 and those activities continued under FISC authority. This includes
the program described by the President in a

17 December 2005 radio address as the Terrorist Surveillance Program,
which was content coilected under the Authorization.

TOP SE CRE T//S TL W/VC OMIN T /0R C ON/N 0F URN

TOP S E CRE T //S T L W/fCOMINT/ORCONWOFORN

WORKING DRAFT

II. REVIEW CATEGORIES

(U) ONE: ESTABLISHMENT OF THE AUTHORITY

(Uf/FO U0) Immediately after the attacks off] September 2001, NSA considered
how to work within existing SIGINT authorities to counter the terrorist threat
within the United States and adjusted SIGIN T processes accordingly. Shortly
thereaﬁ‘er; in response to a White House request, the Director of NSA identified
SIGINT collection gaps. The Counsel to the Vice President used this information
to draft the Presidential authorization that established the PSP.

(U) Actions Taken After 9/1 1

 

(TS/lSUfNF) On 14 September 2001, three days after terrorist attacks in the
United States, General Hayden approved the targeting of terrorist-
associated foreign telephone numbers on communication links between the
United States and foreign countries where terrorists were known to be
operating. Only speciﬁed, pro-approved numbers were allowed to be
tasked for collection against U.S.~originating links. He authorized this
collection at Special Collection Service and Foreign Satellite sites with
access to links between the United States and countries of interest,
including Afghanistan. According to the Deputy General Counsel, General
Hayden determined by 26 September that any Afghan telephone number in
contact with a US. telephone number on or after 26 September was
presnmed to be of foreign intelligence value and could be disseminated to
the FBI.

(TS/lSllfN F) NSA DGC said General Hayden’s action was a lawful
exercise of his power under Executive Order 03.0.) 12333, United States
Intelligence Activities, as amended. The targeting of communication links
with one end in the United States was a more aggressive use of ED. 12333
authority than that exercised by former Directors. General Hayden was
operating in a unique environment in which it was a widely held belief that
additional terrorist attacks on US. soil were imminent. General Hayden
said this was a “tactical decision.”

TOP SE CRE T//S T L W/fCOMINTfORCONﬂVOFORN

TOP SE CHE T #3 TL WXXCOMINT/ORCON/NOFORN

S1109-0002
WORKING DRAFT

(Ul/FDUO) On 2 October 200 l , General Hayden briefed the House
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI) on this decision and
later informed members of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
(SSCI) by telephone. He had also informed DCI George Tenet.

(TS) At the same time NSA was assessing collection gaps and increasing
efforts against terrorist targets immediately after the ll September attacks, .
it was responding to Department of Defense ([3013), Director of Central
Intelligence Community Management Staff questions about its ability to
counter the new threat.

(U) Need to Expand NSA Authority

 

(Ut/FOUO) General Hayden said that soon aﬁer he told Mr. Tenet about
NBA actions to ecunter the threat, Mr. Tenet shared the information with
the “Oval Ofﬁce.” Mr. Tenet relayed that the Vice President wanted to
know if NSA could be doing more. General Hayden replied that nothing
else could be done within existing NSA authorities. In a follow-up
telephone conversation, Mr. Tenet asked General Hayden what could be
done if he had additional authorities. General Hayden said that these
discussions were not documented.

(UI/FOUO) NSA Identifies StGiNT Collection Gaps

(TSI/SI/INF) To respond to the Vice President, General Hayden met with
NSA personnel who were already working to identify and fill SIGiNT
collection gaps in light of the recent terrorist attacks. General Hayden
stated that he met with personnel to identify which additional authorities
would be operationally useful and technically feasible. In particular,
discussions focused on how NSA might bridge the “international gap.” An
NSA Technical Director described that gap in these terms:

"Here is NSA standing at the (LS. border looking ontwardfor
foreign threats. There is the FBI looking within the United
States for domestic threats. But no one was looking at the
foreign threat-5' coming into the United States. That was a
huge gap that NSA wanted to cover. ”

(TS/fSI/INF) Possible Solutions. Among other things, NSA considered
how to tweak transit Collection—the collection of communications
transiting through but not originating or terminating in the United States.
NSA personnel also resurfaced a concept proposed in 1999 to address the

TOP SE CRE T //S TL W/fCOMINT/ORCONAVOFORN

TOP SE CRE T HS T L W//C OMIN T/OR C ONﬂV 0F URN

WORKING DRAFT

Millennium Threat. NSA proposed that it would perform contact chaining
on metadata it had collected. Analysts would chain through masked U.S.
telephone numbers to discover foreign cennections to those numbers,
without Specifying, even for analysts, the U.S. number involved. In
December 1999, the Department of Justice (DoJ),

“ i  (OIPR) told NSA that the proposal fell within one of the
FISA deﬁnitions of electronic surveillance and, therefore, was not
permissible when applied to metadata associated with presumed U.S.
persons (i.e., U.S. telephone numbers not approved for targeting by the
FISC).

   

liiin'ﬁ :jli iiiii“|il"l'_-‘.“,ilt'ft"

 
 

(TS/ESI/INF) Collection gaps not adequately ﬁlled by FISA
authorized intercept. NSA determined that FISA authorization did not
allow suﬁicient flexibility to counter the new terrorist threat. First, it
believed that because of technological advances, the jurisdiction of the
FISC went beyond the original intent of the statute. For example, most
communications signals no longer ﬂowed through radio agencies-signals or
via phone svstems as they did in 1973 when the FISA was written. By
200], internet communications were used worldwide, undersea cables
carried huge volumes of communications, and a large amount of the
world’s communications passed through the United States. Because of
language used in the Act in 1978, NSA was required to obtain court orders
to target email accounts used by non-US. persons outside the United States
if it intended to intercept the communications at a webmail service within
the United States. Large numbers of terrorists were using such accounts in
2001.

(TS/fSII/NF) Second, NSA believed that the FISA process was unable to
accommodate the number of terrorist targets or the speed with which they
changed their communications. From the time NSA sent FISA requests to
the Do], OIPR until the time data arrived at NSA, the average wait was
between four and six weeks. Terrorists cculd have changed their telephone
numbers or internet addresses before NSA received FISC approval to target
them. NSA believed the large number of terrorist targets and their
frequently changing communications would have overwhelmed the
existing PISA process.

(TSIISIIINF) Emergency FISA provision not an option. NSA
determined that even using emergency FISA court orders would not
provide the speed and ﬂexibility needed to counter the terrorist threat.
First, although the emergency authorization provision permitted 72 hours
of surveillance without obtaining a court order, it did not—as many
believed—allow the Government to undertake surveillance immediately.
Rather, the Attorney General had to ensure that emergency surveillance
weald ultimately be acceptable to the FISC. He had to be certain the court

TOP SECRET/145‘ TL W/fC OMIN T fOR CON/N 0F ORN

S1109-0002
WORKING DRAFT

TOP SE CRE T//S T L W//COMINT/0RCON/NOFORN

would grant a warrant before initiating emergency surveillance.
Additionally, before NSA surveillance requests were submitted to the
Attorney General, they had to be reviewed by NSA intelligence ofﬁcers,
NSA attorneys, and Department of Justice attorneys. Each reviewer had to
be satisﬁed that standards had been met before the request proceeded to the
next review group, and each request was certiﬁed by a Senior oﬁicial in the
DOD, usually the Secretary or Deputy Secretary. From the time NSA sent a
request to Justice’s OIPR until the time data arrived at NBA, the average
wait was between a day and a day and a half. In the existing threat
environment with U.S. interests at risk, NSA deemed the wait too long.

 

(Ul/FOUO) Early Efforts to Amend PISA

(TS/{Sll/NF) Given the limitations of PISA, there were eariy
efforts to amend the statute. For example, shortly after 11
September, the HPSCI asked NSA for technical assistance
in drafting a proposal to amend Section ill of FlSA that
would give the President the authority to conduct electronic
surveillances without a court order for the purpose of
obtaining foreign intelligence information. On

20 September 2001, the NSA General Counsei wrote to
Judge Alberto Gonzales, Counsel to the President, asking
whether the pmpOSal had merit. We found no record of a
response.

(Uri/Foth) We could not detennine why early efforts to
amend PISA were abandoned. Anecdotal evidence
suggests that government ofﬁcials feared the public debate
surrounding any changes to FlSA would compromise
ihtéllig‘ eng e sources and methods.

 

 

(U) NSA identifies SlGlNT collection gaps to Vice President’s Office.

(TS/iSI/iN F) Because early discussions about expanding NSA’s authority
were not documented, we do not have records of Speciﬁc topics discussed
or people who attended General Hayden’s meetings with White House
representatives. General Hayden stated that after consulting with NSA
personnel, he described to the White House how NSA collection of
communications on a wire inside the United States was constrained by the
FISA statute. Speciﬁcally, NSA could not collect from a wire in the United

TOP SE CR E T r75 TL W/fC’OMINT/OR CON/NOFORN

TOP SE CRE Tf/S TL W//COMINT/0RCONWOFORN

WORKING DRAFT

States, without a court order, either content or metadata from
communications links with either one or both ends in the United States.
Furthermore, General Hayden pointed out that communications metadata
did not have the same level of constitutional protection as content and that
access to metadata of communications with one end in the United States
would signiﬁcantly enhance NSA’s analytic capabilities. General Hayden
suggested that the ability to collect communications with one end in the
United States without a court order would increase NSA’s speed and
agility. General Hayden stated that after two additional meetings with the
Vice President, the Vice President asked him to work with his Counsel,
David Addington.

(U) Presidential Authorization Drafted and Signed

 

(TS/lSI/IORJN F) According to General Hayden, the Vice President’s
Counsel, David Addington, draﬁed the firstAuthorization. General
Hayden described himself as the “subject matter expert” but stated that no
other NSA personnel participated in the draﬁing process, including the
General Counsel. He also said that Department of Justice (DOJ)
representatives were not involved in any of the discussions that he attended
and he did not otherwise inform them.

(TS/ISU/NF) General Hayden said he was “surprised with a small ‘5’ "
when the Authorization was signed on 4 October 2001, and that it Only
changed the location from which NSA could collect communications.

Rules for minimizing US. person information still had to be followed.

(UIIFDUD) SIGINT Activity Authorized by the President

 

(TSﬂ'SI/fOR/NF) On 4 October 2001, the President delegated authority
through the Secretary of Defense to the Director of NSA to conduct
specified electronic surveillance on targets related to Afghanistan and
international terrorism for 30 days. Because the surveillance included wire
and cable communications carried into or out of the United States, it would
otherwise have required FISC authority.

(TS/ISI/ISTLWIJ’NF) The Authorization allowed NSA to conduct four types
of collection activity:

Telephony content

Internet content

TOP S E CR E T//S TL Wf/COMI N T/OR CONAV 0F ORN

TOP SECRET/VS T L WJJ’COMIN TJ' 0R C ONﬂV DFDRN

S 7109-0002
WORKING DRAFT

Telephony metadata
Internet metadata

(TS/ISI/INF) NSA could collect the content and associated metadata of
telephony and Internet communications for which there was probable cause
to believe that one of the communicants was in Afghanistan or that one
communicant was engaged in or preparing for acts of international
terrorism. In addition, NSA was authorized to acquire telephony and
Internet metadata for communications with at least one comlnunicant
outside the United States or for which no communicant was known to be a
citizen of the United States. NSA was also allowed to retain, process,
analyze and disseminate intelligence from the communications acquired
under the authority.

(Ul/FOUO) Subsequent Changes to the Authorization

(TS/ISWNF) After the ﬁrst Presidential authorization, the speciﬁc terms,
wording, or interpretation of the renewals periodically changed. (See
Appendix B for a completed listing of changes.)

(TS/fSIffNF) Domestic Collection. The wording of the ﬁrst
authorization could have been interpreted to allow domestic content
collection where both communicants were located in the U.S. or were U.S.
persons. General Hayden recalled that when the Counsel to the Vice
President pointed this out, General Hayden told him that NSA would not
collect domestic communications because 1) NSA was a foreign intelligence
agency, 2) NSA infrastructure did not support domestic collection, and 3) his
personal standard was so high that there woald be no problem getting a
FISC order for domestic collection.

(TSf/Sl/INF) Afghanistan. In January 2002, after the Taliban was forced
out of power, Afghanistan was no longer speciﬁcally identiﬁed in the
Authorization.

(TS/ISU/NF) Iraqi Intelligence Service. For a limited period of time
surrounding the 2003 invasion of Iraq, the President authorized the use of
PSP authority against the Iraqi Intelligence Service. On 28 March 2003,
the DCI determined that, based on then current intelligence, the Iraqi
Intelligence service was engaged in terrorist activities and presented a
threat to U.S. interests in the United States and abroad. Through the
Deputy DCI, Mr. Tenet received the President’s concurrence that P3P
authorities could he used against the Iraqi Intelligence Service. NSA
ceased using the Authority for this purpose in March 2004.

TOP SE C'RE T #3 TL W//COMINT/0RCONWOFORN

TOP SE C‘RE Tf/S T L W/fCOMI N T/OR CON/W 0F URN

WORKING DRAFT

(U) TWO: IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AUTHORITY AND
RESULTING SIGINT PRODUCT

(TS//Sl//NF) General Hayden said that although he felt comfortable
exercising the Presidential authorization and believed it to be legal, he
recognized that it was politically sensitive and controversial and would be
subjected to scrutiny at some point in time. He and NSA leadership strove
to ensure that NSA personnel executed the terms of the Authorization with
care and diligence and that they not go beyond that which was authorized.
PSP-reiated operations began on 6 October. Early on, personnel Worked
under the assumption that the Authorization was temporary and that
operations would stop in the near future. After it became evident that the
Authority would be continuously renewed, management focused on
designing processes and procedures for Pregram activity.

(UIIFOUO) Stand Up of Operations

 

(TS/lSIilNF) 0n 4 October 2001, after receiving the Authorization, General
Hayden informed the SIGINT Director and other key personnel of NSA’s
new authorities and asked the NSA General Counsel if the Authorization
was legal. The General Counsel said that the next day, 5 October, he told
General Hayden that he believed it was legal (see Appendix D).

(TSilSIIlDC/NF) Under General Hayden’s direction, immediate steps were
taken to implement the temporary authority.

A 24-hour watch operation, the Metadata Analysis Center (MAC),
was created in the Signals Intelligence Directorate (SID).

The ﬁrst Program Manager was identified and informed of his new
responsibilities.

A cadre of experienced operational personnel was chosen to
implement the Program.

Office space was identiﬁed to accommodate newly assigned
personnel.

TOP SE CRE T//S T L W// C OMIN 7701? C ONﬂV 0F ORN

S1109-0002
WORKING DRAFT

TOP SECRET/13H. W/fC OMIN T/OR C ON/WOF ORN

A new security compartment with the temporary cover term
STARBURST was established.3

Fifty computer servers to store and process data acquired under the
new authority were ordered.‘

Initial funding of $25 million for PSP operations was obtained from
the DCI.

(TS/f81/fNF)On Saturday and Sunday, 6 and 7 October, small gmups of
operational personnel were called at home and asked to report to work for
special PSP clearance brieﬁngs.

(TS/ISUJ‘OR/NF) On Monday, 8 October 2001, Columbus Day, General
Hayden briefed the analysts, programmers, and mathematicians that had
been selected to implement the Authorization. At that brieﬁng, General
Hayden said he did not share the speciﬁc content of the Authorization with
attendees but relayed key information such as:

The Authorization came from the President.
The Authorization was temporary.

The Authorization was intended to be an early warning system of
impending terrorist attacks in the United States.

The NBA General Counsel had reviewed the Authorization and
concluded that it was legal.

NSA would do exactly what the Authorization stated and “not one
electron or photon more."

IE The Authorization should be kept secret and it required strict
compartmentation. Attendees had to sign a non—disclosure
agreement.

(TS/ISI/INF) General Hayden stated that after he briefed the attendees, he
turned the brieﬁng over to the General Counsel to discuss the terms of the
Authorizatiou.

3(TSHSI/INF) A permanent cover term, STELLARWIND, was assigned to Program information on 3| October

2001.

‘(TS/lSI/INF) Because of the heightened terrorist threat, at NSA’s request, a vendor diverted a shipment of
servers intended for other recipients to NSA, where they arrived under police escort on 13 October 2001.

TOP SECRE T KS T L Wf/COMIN T /0RC DIV/W 0F URN

10

TOP SECRE T/AS' TL W/fCGMINTIOR CONWOFORN

WORKING DRAFT

(U) Early Operations

 

(TS/ISI/INF) Within one week, approximately 90 NSA employees were
cleared for access to the PSP. On 11 October 200], the Associate General
Counsel for Operations and the NSA Deputy General Counsel were cleared
for the Program and agreed with the NSA General Counsel’s determination
that the Authorization was legal. NSA OGC did not formally document its
opinions or legal rationale (see Appendix D).

(TS//SI-STLW/INF) The MAC was created to analyze metadata obtained
under PSP authorization. By 7 October 2001, it was a 24-hour 7-day a
week watch center with 20 analysts, reporters, and software developers
working in three shifts. Many MAC employees were former Russian traffic
analysts with manual call chaining analysis experience. Initially, the MAC
reported directly to General Hayden and the Deputy Director. The MAC
Chief briefed the Director every week, and the Deputy Director visited
MAC Spaces for a brieﬁng each evening.

(TS/KSINNF) While the MAC was setting up to analyze PSP metadata, the
Countertezrorism (CT) Product Line was realigning to conduct PSP content
tasking and analysis. The MAC and the CT Product Line worked closely
together to coordinate efforts and share information. The CT Product Line
was growing rapidly as handpicked employees were m0ved to support the
new mission.

(TS/ISI/INF) Within 30 days, the PSP was fully operational. While
awaiting delivery of requested computer servers, the FBI and CIA gave
NSA lead telephone numbers, and the MAC was able to immediately chain
within the United States with SIGINT collected overseas. Private sector
partners began to send telephony and Internet content to NSA in October
2001. They began to send telephony and Internet metadata to NBA as early
as November 2001.

(UIIFOUO) (In-Going Operations

 

(TS/{Slf/NF) After Operations began and it became evident that the
Authorization was likely to be renewed indefinitely, NSA management
became increasingly focused on designing processes and procedures to
implement the Program effectively and to ensure compliance with the
Authorization.

TOP SECRE T//S TL W//COMI N 1701? COM/N 0F GEN

11

TOP SE CRE T//S TL Wf/COMINT/ORCON/I‘VOFORN

51309-0002
WORKING DRAFT

(U) Organizational Structure

(TS/ISlf/NF) NSA conducted all PSP analysis and reporting at its
headquarters at Ft. Meade, Maryland, within the SIGINT Directorate.
Speciﬁcally, tasking approvals, analysis, and reporting were conducted in
the CT Product Line within SID, Analysis and Production. Collection of
data was managed in SID, Directorate for AcquisitiOn. No PSP activities
were managed at NSA ﬁeld sites.

 

(TS/ISI/INF) Although the formal chain of command for SIGINT
operations was through SID, in practice, the Director and Deputy Director
of NSA/CSS managed the Program while keeping the SIGINT Director
informed. Over time, the SIGINT Director became more involved, but the
Director and Deputy Director always maintained direct operational control.

(TSf/SWNF) Program Manager. Five ofﬁcials held the Program
Manager position over the life of the PSP.’ Initially, the Program Manager
reported to the Chief of the CT Product Line. In 2004, the Program
Manager position was restructured as the SID Program Manager for CT
Special Projects and elevated to report to the SIGINT Director. This
allowed the Program Manager jurisdiction of PSP elements across SID, not
just those within the Directorate for Analysis and Production. At that time,
the position was also formally designated as a senior level civilian position.
A small staff was added to form the Program Management Ofﬁce.

(TS/ISIIINF) SID Analysis and Production. Initially, the MAC
analyzed PSP metadata (data that describes the content, events, or networks
associated with SIGINT targets), while SIGINT Development in the CT
Product Line analyzed non—P3P metadata. The CT Product Line performed
PSP content analysis. SIGINT Development, a separate organization
within the SID, managed approvals for content tasking. In 2004, the
analysis and production of metadata and content were consolidated into a
new organization called the Advanced Analysis Division (AAD). AAD
was divided into three teams: internet metadata, telephony metadata, and
content.

(TSﬂSlf/NF) Coordination with FBI and CIA. By 2004, four FBI

integrees and two CIA integrees, operating under SIGINT authorities in
accordance with written agreements, were co—located with NSA PSP~

5(TSl/Slr‘fNF) The Chief of the CT Product Line was Acting Program Manager for a brief time in 2004.
TOP S E CR E TZ/S TL W//COMIN TIDE C ONW 0F URN

12

(U) Metadata

TOP S E CRE T KS TL W//COMINT/0RCONWOFORN

WORKING DRAFT

cleared analysts. The purpoSe ofcoulocating these individuals was to
improve collaborative analytic efforts.

(TS/ISI/INF) SID Data Acquisition. Through the life of the Program,
data collection was managed by Special Source Operations in SID, Data
Acquisition Directorate. Collection managers were responsible for putting
telephone numbers and email selectors on PSPdauthorized collection by
private sector companies and taking them off collectiOn.

(TS/ISI/INF) The authority to collect bqu telephony and Internet metadata
signiﬁcantly enhanced NSA’s ability to identity activity that may have been
terrorist—related. Contact chaining is the process of building a network
graph that models the communication (e-maii, telephony, etc.) patterns of
targeted entities (peeple, organizations, etc) and their associates from the
communications sent or received by the targets.6 Metadata is data that
describes other data, speciﬁcally information that describes the content,
events or networks associated with SIGINT targets. For example, for an
email message, it would include the sender and recipient email addresses.
It does not contain the subject line or the text of the email; they are

considered to be content. Likewise. For a telephone conversation, metadata
wgitld include the called number and the calling number as well as the

duration ol‘thc on, H.

(TS/KSI/INF) Although NSA had the capability to collect bulk telephony
and Internet metadata prior to the PSP, its application was limited because
NSA did not have the authority to collect communications in which one
end tt_he number beina called 01' the recipient address of an e-mail) was in
the United States. PSP signiﬁcantly increased the data available to NBA
analysts and allowed them to create more thorough contact chaining. This
gave NSA the key to an early warning system—the ability to identify
individuals in the United States or individuals outside the US. using US.
telecommunications structures in contact with a foreign target, a terrorist.

(TSIISIIINF) Because metadata was not constitutionally protected, NSA
did not consider it to be as sensitive as content collection. Nevertheless,
processes were set up to document requests for metadata analysis and
justiﬁcations fer conducting such analysis under Program authority. The

5 (TS/ISl/IOC/NF) Additional chaining can be performed on the associates” contacts to determine patterns in
the way a network of targets may communicate. Additional degrees of separation from the initial target are
referred to as “hops.” For example a direct contact is one hop away from the target. A contact of the direct
centact would be described as being 2 hops away from the target. The resulting contact-graph is subsequently
analyzed for intelligence and to devel0p potential investigative leads.

TOP SECRE T A’S T L Wf/COMIN T /0R CONW 01" GEN

13

S 7309-0002
WORKING DRAFT

TOP SE CRE T//S TL Wf/C 0M1 N T/DR C (IN/W 0F URN

following describes the process used to obtain requests, conduct analysis,
and report results under the PSP. (See Appendix E for a ﬂowchart of the
end—towend process.)

(TS/ISIIINF) Requests for Information and Leads. Contact chaining
analysis requests were received from FBI, CIA, or NSA. Requests
typically took one of two forms, Requests for Information (RFI) and Leads.
RFIs were speciﬁc questions about a target’s telephone numbers or email
addresses, called “selectors” at NSA. Leads were more general requests
about a target’s contacts. Requestors submitted leads to discover new
investigative leads. Contact chaining requests were documented from the
inception of the PSP.

(TS/ISU/OCINF) Approvals to Chain. Prior to chaining, NSA
counterterrorism shiﬁ coordinators reviewed chaining requests to
determine whether they met criteria provided by the 00C and based on the
terms of the Authorization. They had to have enough information to
identify a terrorism nexus and demonstrate Compliance with criteria
required by the Authorization before analysis could begin. Shift
coordinators either approved requests, approved them for 1-hop (direct
contact) analysis, or denied them. Approved requests were passed to
analysts for contact chaining.

(TSHSl/JOCKNF) Analysis. NSA used a variety of tools to conduct
metadata analysis and view the results. NSA’s primary tool for conducting
metadata analysis, for PSP and traditional SIGINT collection, was
MAINWAY. MAIN WAY was used for storage, contact chaining, and for
analyzing large volumes of global communications metadata. At the
beginning of the PSP, only the “SIGINT Navigator" tool was available to
view MAINWAY output. Over time, new tools and new processes, such as
automated chaining alerting, were created to improve analysts‘ efficiency.
To obtain the most complete results, analysts used data collected under PSP
and nonuPSP authorities. Typicaliy, they analyzed networks with two
degrees of separation (two hops) from the target. Analysts determined if
resulting information was reportable.

(TS/ISI/JOCINF) In addition, an automated chaining alert process was
created to alert analysts of new potentially reportable selectors. Previously
approved selectors were compared to incoming MAINWAY data
authorized by the PSP, ED. 12333, or the FISC. Alerts of direct contacts
with approved selectors were reported to NSA analysts for further analysis
and potential reporting to PE] and CIA.

TOP SE CRE T MS' TL W/fCOMINT/ORCONWOFORN

14

(U) Content

TOP SECRET/AS TL W/fCOMINT/ORCONWOFORN

WORKING DRAFT

(TS/ISU/NF) Storage. NSA stored metadata obtained under PSP
authorities in a protected database. Only cleared and trained analysts were
given access to PSP metadata.

(TS/ISI/IOCfNF) Reporting. Reports based on metadata analysis were
typically referred to as “tippers.” Tippers contained contact chaining
analysis results relevant to terrorism or with potential links to terrorism that
warranted the attention of the FBI or the CIA for further investigation.
Before releasing reports with US. person informatiOn, analysts obtained
permission to do so in accordance with established NSA dissemination
procedures.

(TS/KSl/IOCIN F) For each published report, NSA retained documentation
of the analysis, supporting RF 1 or lead information, and a justiﬁcation
statement explaining the link to terrorism. If a report was not published,
documentation was not retained. Counterterrorism personnel manually
updated information in a computer tracking system to reflect the
disposition of chaining requests.

(TS/ISI/INF) Collection and analysis of centent is NSA’s traditional wav of
reporting meane—efeendnet—in-g SIGINT. Content generally refers to words
spoken during a telephone conversation or the written text of an email
message. NSA collection of the content of telephony and Internet
communications under the PSP improved its ability to produce intelligence
on terroristnrelated activity. For example, by allowing NSA access to links
carrying communications with one end in the United States, NSA
significantly increased its access to transiting foreign communications, i.e.,
with both communicants outside the United States. General Hayden
deacribed this as “the real gold of the Program." And, by allowing the
intercept of international communications, NSA was able to identify threats
within the United States.

(TS/ISIUNF) From the start of the Program until January 2007, NSA issued
490 reports based on PSP-derived content information. Also, as shown
below, approximately 37,664 telephony and Internet selectOrs were tasked
for

PEP-authorized content collection during that time period. Only 3 percent
were U.S. targets. The vast majority

(92 percent) were foreign.

(TS/1‘ SI/IOCfN F)

TOP SE CRE T//S T L W//COMINT/ORCON/NOFORN

15

TOP SE C RE Tl/S T L W//COMIN T/OR C ON/N 0F ORN

 

   

 

 

 

51109-0002
WORKING DRAFT
Approximate Number of Selectors Targeted for PSP Content Collection
4 Oct 2001 to 17 Jan 2007 *
U.S. Telephony
U.8. E-mail
(406)
Foreign E-mail
(19,000)
(Ts/Iswocmr)

(TS/l SI/IN F) NSA leadership considered selectors for targets located in the
United States to be extremely sensitive. As such, procesSes were set up to
ensure strict compliance with the terms of the Authorization. The
following describes the general process for tasking, collecting, storing and
reporting telephony and Internet content under the PSP. (See Appendix F
for a ﬂowchart of the end-to-end process.)

(TS/fSU/STLWI/NF) Tasking Approvals. Under the PSP, each domestic
selector tasked for content collection was formally approved and tracked.
Analysts submitted content collection requests, also called tasking
packages, to the Chief of CT for approval. Tasking packages contained a
narrative analysis, conclusion, supporting information, documentatiOn, and
a checklist of package contents. In the Chief 's absence, the Deputy Chief
of CT or the Program Manager could approve the requests. The approving
officials reviewed the tasking packages to ensure that the proposed target
and related meradata selectors met criteria in the Authorization. If criteria
were not met, the ofﬁcials requested additional information or denied the
request. In limited cases, collection was approved for speciﬁc time
periods. If the content contained foreign intelligence, the time period for
collection would be extended. If it did not, collection was stopped. All
approvals were documented in tasking packages.

TOP SEC RE TIS T L W/ICOMIN T /0RCON/N OF URN

16

TOP S E C R E T/riS' T L W/fCOMIN T/OR C (IN/N 0F URN

WORKING DRAFT

(TS/ISI/INF) Foreign selectors tasked for PSP content collection did not
require formal approvals 0r tasking packages. Analysts were responsible
for determining whether a foreign selector met the criteria for foreign

intelligence ternasei—theﬁet-leeeteam.

(TS/iSI/I'NF) Collection. After a domestic selector was approved for PSP
content collection, it was identiﬁed as “tasked” in the STELLARWIND
Addre55es Database by CTIAAD tasking managers who then emailed a
collection tasking request to the 880 Collection Manager for telephony
and Internet content collection. Foreign selector content collection
requests were sent directly to the 880 Collection Manager. They did not
require special approval.

(TSf/Sl/ISTLW/fN F) 380 collection managers were responsible for
ensuring that telephony and Internet content selectors were put on or taken
off collection. For teiﬁahenﬁelepltonv content selectors, collection
managers sent content collection tasking instructions to private sector
companies. Private sector companies were responsible for implementing
tasking at front-end devices to obtain the required content collection. For
Intemet content selectors, collection managers sent content tasking
instructions directly to equipment installed at

company-controlled locations. Collected data was sent back to NSNSSO
and made available to analysts through the HYBRID voice processing
system for telephony content selectors or the PFNWALE database for
Internet content selectors. SSO collection managers worked with private
sector companies and the CT Product Line to ensure that collected data was
as intended and legally authorized.

 

 

 

 

 

(TS/(SHIN F) Storage. Content (voice or dBata) collected under PSP was
stored in protected partitions in existing NSA databases. Access to the
partitions was restricted to PSP-cleared personnel.

(TS/[SHINE Reporting. After analyzing content data collected under
Presidential authority and identifying foreign intelligence information,
counterterrorism analysts wrote reports. After an initial review within the
CT Product Line, some reports were sent to SID Oversight and ComplianCe
(0&C) for a second review for U.S. person identities. 0&0 reviewers
determined whether the US. identities in the report were necessary to
assess or understand the foreign intelligence information being reported E
was required within the conduct oirecipient‘s Qfﬁcial duties . If an identity
was found to be unnecessary, it was not reported. Before any US. person
information was disseminated in reporting, internal NSA approvals were
obtained as required by United States Signals Intelligence Directive
SP0018 — Legal Complianw and Minimization Procedures.

 

T 0P SECRET//S TL W/fCOMIN T A9]? C ONﬂVOF GEN

17

81109-0002
WORKING DMFT

TOP SE CRE T f/iS' T L W//COMIN T/ORCONWOFORN

(TS/ISl/ISTLW/INF) Initially, NSA responded to PE] and CIA information
requests in encrypted email. These initial reports, sometimes called
“Tippers” or “Snippets,” were “hidden in plain sight,” meaning the
information in the report did not reveal the source of the information.
Later, FBI and CIA wanted to understand how NSA knew certain
information that could not be provided in normal reporting channels.
Eventually, “tear line” reporting was established. Tear lines are used
regularly by NSA as a way to report SIGINT—derived infermation and
sanitized infonnation in the same report to appropriately cleared
individuals. The sanitized “tear line” information conveys the same basic
facts as the COMINT—controlled information while hiding COMINT as the
source.

(TS/ISIIINF) Dissemination of SIG-INT Product

 

(TSf/SI/INF) Regardless of which organization submitted requests or leads
to NSA, all resulting reports were sent to CIA and FBI. Reports answered
speciﬁc RF I questions or provided new investigative leads developed from
chaining analysis. Reports contained selectors of interest (potential leads)
with potential terrorist connections, not full chaining results. NSA had
minimal insight into how CIA and FBI used PSP products.

(U) Discovery Requests

 

(U) On occasion, the Department of Justice (DoJ) attorneys determine that
the facts of a particular matterjustify a search of NBA ﬁles and submit a
search request. In resPOnSe to those requests or in response to discovery
orders, NSA conducts a search of its databases to locate records that may
fall within the scope of DoJ’s discovery obligations and Rule 16 of the
Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure. Typically the search process begins
with a written request from Do] including the names and aliases of
individuals. NSA attorneys work with personnel trained in the retrieval of
NBA reports to craft search strategies reasonably designed to identify
reporting that may be responsive to the request. These search strategies are
then used to perform electronic searches of NSA repositories of
dissominated foreign intelligence reports. All responsive reports, to the
extent any exist, are made available for review by DoJ.

(TS/ISI) NSA searches only databases of reported intelligence and does not

search databases containing acquired but not processed information (e.g.,
raw trafﬁc) or acquired and processed but not reported or di55eminated

TOP SE CRE T //S T L W/JCOMIN T /0R CON/N 0F URN

18

TOP S E C RE T//S TL W//COMINT/0RCONWOFORN

WORKING DRAFT

inf'ormation/communications (e.g., gists). NSA would include in its search
applicable disseminated foreign intelligence derived from the PSP.

(TS/{SD After the search is completed, NSA provides all information,
including PEP-derived material, to a small number of appropriately cleared
DoJ individuals in the National Security Division who review the
information on behalf of the D01 and file motions on behalf of the
government and the United States Attorney.

(U) Funding for NSA Activity Authorized by the PSP

 

(TS/ISU/STLW/IN F) NSA spent approximately $146,058,000 in CT
supplemental funds for Program activities from FY02 through FY06. The
funds were given annually to SID for Project MAINWAY hardware and
contract support, anaiytic tools and contract analytic support, and
collaborative partnerships with private sector companies. Funding requests
were submitted annually to the PSP Program Manager and CT program
budget officer. Each request had to justify why funds were needed and
how the purchased item or service would support SID’s PSP activities.

(TS/ISWSTLWf/NF) Program Costs FY01 to FY06 (S in thousands)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Category Description FY02 FY03 FY04 FY05 FY06 Total
Data Metadata and $25,668 $14,050 $ l 5,500 $21,150 $25,900 $102,268
content
(including one
time set-up costs)
Tools and Processing, $9,700 $8,000 $8,000 $9,500 $8,000 $43,200
Systems display and
manipulations
capabilities
Infrastructure Facilities and $590 0 0 0 0 $590
equipment to
suppon program
TOTALS $35,958 $22,050 $23,500 $30,650 $33,900 $146,058

 

TOP S E CRE T/fS T L W//COMINT/0R CONWOFORN

I9

 

TOP SE CRE T //S T L WﬂCOMINT/ORCONWOFORN

51109-0002
WORKING DRAFT

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TOP SE CRE T //.5' TL W//COMI N T /0R C ON/N 0F URN

20

 

 

TOP SE CRE 7755' T L W//COMINT/0RCONWOFORN

WORKING DRAFT

(U) THREE: ACCESS TO LEGAL REVIEWS, THE
AUTHORIZATION, AND INFORMATION ABOUT THE PROGRAM

(Uf/FOUO) NSA did not haVe access to the original OLC legal
opinion, but did have access and provided input to an OLC opinion
prepared in 2004. The original Authorization and renewals were kept
in the NSA Director's safe, and access to the documents was tightly
controlled. By January 2007, nearly 3,000 people had been briefed
on the P33 including members of Congress and the FlSC.

(U) Access to Legal Reviews

 

(TS/iSIllNF) The NSA did not have access to the early Do] Ofﬁce of
Legal Counsel (OLC) Opinions supporting the Attorney General’s
statement that the PSP was legal. Genera] Hayden, NSA lawyers, and the
NSA Inspector General agreed that it was not necessary for them to see the
early opinions in order to execute the terms of the Authorization, but felt it
would be helpful to do so. NSA was, however, given access and provided
comments to the DLC opinion issued in 2004.

(U) Access to OLC’s Original Legal Review

(TS/{SU/NF) Two NSA requests for access to the original OLC‘ legal
opinion were denied.

(TS/lSIifNF) First Request. NSA General Counsel Robert Deitz stated that
he asked the Vice President’s Counsel if he could see the opinion. Even
though Mr. Deitz’s request was denied, the Vice President’s Counsel read a
few paragraphs of the opinion to him over the classiﬁed telephone line]

(TS/fSl/fN F) Second Request. At a 3 December 2003 meeting with the
DoJ Associate Deputy Attorney General to discuss collection of metadata
and an upcoming NSA OIG compliance audit, NSA’s IG and Deputy GC
requested to see the OLC legal Opinion. The Counsel to the Vice President,
who unexpectedly attended the meeting, denied the request and said that
any requast to see the opinion had to come directly from General Hayden.

(TS/[SHINE General Hayden stated he never asked for or read the OLC
legal opinion supporting the PSP. The Deputy GC stated that it was his

TOP SE CRE T //"S T L W//C‘0MINT/0RCON/NOFORN

2i

S T—09— 0002
WORKING DRAFT

TOP SE CRE T //S T L W/fC OMIN T / 0R C ON/N 0F ORN

understanding that the opinion was not shared with NSA because it was
considered conﬁdential legal advice to the President.

(TSf/SII/NF) The IG, GC, and Deputy GC agreed that their inability to read
the OLC opinion did not prevent or impair them from executing and
overseeing the Program. They were able to determine legality of the
Program independently from Do] (see Appendix D). However, the IG said
that he found the secrecy surrounding the legal rationale to be “odd.”
Speciﬁcally, he said that it was “strange that NSA was told to execute a
secret program that everyone knew presented legal questions, without
being told the underpinning legal theory." The [C3, GC, and Deputy GC all
stated that they had yet to see the full text of the original OLC opinion.

(Ul/FOUO) Assess to the May 2004 Opinion

(U/IFOUD) In 2003 and 2004, the Do] Associate Deputy Attorney General
and the OLC Assistant Attorney General visited NSA to receive brieﬁngs
on the PSP. On 04 May 2004, NSA, at the request of the OLE Assistant
Attorney General, provided comments on the OLC’s draft opinion on the
Legality of the PSP. The OLC Assistant Attorney General submitted his
opinion on 06 May 2004.

(UIIFOUO) Access to the Presidential Authorization

 

(TS/ISI/fNF) As directed by the White House, access to the original
Presidential authorization and subsequent renewals was tightly controlled.

((3) The Vice President’s Counsel drafted the Authorizations and personally
delivered them to NSA. On a few occasions, NSA picked up the
Authorization at the White House.

(C) The first Authorization and subsequent renewals were kept in a safe in

the Director’s oﬁice. Initially, access was limited to General Hayden and a
few others, including three OGC attorneys, Program Managers, and certain
operational personnel. Those with access were not allowed to disseminate

the Authorizations.

(TS/fSI/INF) lmportantly, most NSA operations personnel, including the
Chief of the CT Product Line, who approved tasking for content collection,
were not allowed to see the actual authorization. Rather, OGC answered
targeting, information sharing, and implementation legal questions on an
“on call” basis for operators. When the Authorization changed, OGC

TOP SE CRE T/VS T L W//COMINT/0R CON/NOFORN

22

TOP SE CRE T’ A’S TL W/I’COMINT/ORCONWOFORN

WORKING DRAFT

summarized those changes in emails distributed to key program executives
or communicated changes in due diligence meetings.

(TSI/SI/IOC/N F) Such limited access to the Authorization was documented
in an 16 investigation as a primary causa of two early violations of the
Authorization. At the lG’s recommendation, in March 2003, General
Hayden began issuing Delegation of Authority letters that explained the
Authorization as it applied to executing the Program. A new Delegation of
Authority was promulgated with each renewal of the Authorization. The
Delegation of Authority letters were sent to the Program Manager and the
two managers of the SID CT Product Line and not further disseminated.
(See Section Six.)

(U) Access to Program Information

 

(TSIISII/STLW/IN F) Between 4 October 200] and 17 January 2007, NSA
cleared over 3,000 people for the PSP. The majority worked at NSA.
Others were from the CIA, the FBI, the Department of Justice, Congress,
the FISC, the ODNI, the White House, and the DoD.

(TS/f SINSTLW/IN F) PSP Clearance Totals

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MA 8M W
Enamel
NSA 1,936
C IA 460
FR] 46'?
no.1 64
Congress 60

 

T 01’ SE C'RE 1775 T L W//COMINT/0RCON/NOFORN

23

51109-0002
WORKING DRAFT

TOP S E CR E T #S T L W/J’COMIN T/OR CON/NOFORN

 

 

 

 

 

 

FISC l4
ODNI 13
White House 14
DOD {excluding NSA) 5
Total 3,033

 

 

 

 

(TSf/SI/ISTLW/INF) Within the ﬁrst 30 days of the Program, over 190
people were cleared into the Program. This number included Senators
Robert Graham and Richard Shelby, Congresswoman Nancy Pelosi,
President George W. Bush, Vice President Richard Cheney, Counsel to the
Vice President David Addington, and Presidential Assistant 1. Lewis
“Scooter” Libby. By 31 January 2002, FISC Judge Royce Lamberth was
cleared. By June 2002, over 500 people had been cleared, including two
additional members of Congress, Senator Daniel Inouye and former
Senator Theodore Stevens, as well as FISC Judge Colleen Kollar—Kotelly.
See Appendix G for a list, by date, of the number of people briefed into the
Program.

(U) Non-Operational Personnel

(TS/fSl-ECl/IN F) Knowledge of the PSP was strictly limited at the express
direction of the White House. General Hayden, over time, delegated his
PSP clearance approval authority for NSA, FBI, and CIA OperatiOnal
personnel working the mission to the NSA PSP Program Manager. For
members of Congress, FISC, outside counsel for providers, and the NSA
IG, General Hayden had to obtain approval from the White House.

(U/JFOUO) From the start, General Hayden and NBA leadership pushed to
keep members of the legislative and judicial branches of government
informed. General Hayden Said he told the Vice President that he had no

TOP SE C R E T//S TL W//COMIN T/OR C WW.“r 0F GEN

24

T HP SE CRE T //"S T L WifCOMINT/ORCONWDFORN

WORKING DRAFT

concerns about the lawfulness of the Authorization but worried about the
politics. After some hesitancy, the White House gave General Hayden
permission to brief certain members of Congress. in addition, the Chief
Judge of the FISC was ﬁrst cleared in January 2002 (see Section ).

(TSI/SWNF) Interactions with Members of Congress. Between 25
October 2001 and 17 January 2007, General Hayden, sometimes supported
by operational target experts from the CT Product Line and $80 ofﬁce,
conducted over 49 brieﬁngs to members of Congress or their staff. (See
Appedix __ for a complete list of brieﬁngs.)

(TS/ISI/fNF) General Hayden ﬁrst briefed the following members of
Congress on 25 October 2001:

Chair - House Permanent Select COmmittee on intelligence

Ranking Minority Member of the House Permanent Select
Committee on Intelligence

Chair — Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
Vice Chair — Senate Select Committee on intelligence

(TSI/SI/INF) In addition, NSA received and responded to a variety of
Program-related inquiries from members of Congress, including Senators
Inouye, Stevens, Pelosi, and Rockefeller.

(U/fFOUO ) General Hayden always believed that the PSP was legal. He
said that during the many PSPwrelated brieﬁngs he gave to members of
Congress, no one ever said that NSA should stop what it was doing. He
emphasized that he did not just "ﬂip through slides" during the brieﬁngs.
They lasted as long as attendees desired.

(TS/fSI/INF) Interactions with the FISC. On 31 January 2002, Chief
Judge Royce Lamberth was briefed on the PSP and on 17 May 2002, his

successor, Colleen Kollar-Kotelly, was briefed. A law clerk was also
briefed in April 2004. (See Section Five.)

(U/IFOUO) The Clearance Process

(TS/KSI-ECI/INF) NSA managed the NSA clearance process. Clearance
requests were submitted to the PSP Program Office for Program Manager
approval or disapproval. Access was granted only to those who needed it

TOP SE CRE TX/S T L Wf/COMINT/ORCONWOFORN

25

S 7109-0002
WORKING DRAFT

TOP SE CRE Tf/S TL W//COMINT/0RCON/NOFORN

to perform assigned job duties. The Program Manager questioned access
requests with unclearjustiﬁcations. Approved requests were forwarded to
the Program security ofﬁcer, who performed a security check. If the
security check yielded nothing to impede access, individuals were
instructed to go to the security oﬁ’ice to read the “Security Pro—Brief
Agreement” and sign a “Sensitive Compartmented InformatiOn
Nondisclosure Agreement” form. NSA’s General Counsel also had the
authority to read in Attorneys from other agencies.

(TS/ISl/IN F) On 20 May 2005, the Program Manager changed the PSP
clearance request and re-certiﬁcation process. The Project Security Ofﬁcer
assigned to Special Source Operations in the SIGINT Directorate assumed
responsibility for the PSP clearance process. (Special Source Operations
managed all PSP-related collection for NSA.) Additionally, the Program
Manager initiated monthly PSP clearance brieﬁngs.

(TS/fSI/INF) From 4 October 2001 until 23 May 2005, a two-level PSP
clearance structure was used. One level was limited to the “fact of“
Program existence. A second level included access to PSP targeting data
through a “must know” principle. Access lists were maintained in the 880
Security Director’s oﬁice on an internal SSO compartmented LAN.

(TSI/SI-ECI/INF) Regular zero-based reviews were conducted by the 880
Security Director’s oﬁice quarteriy to validate that cleared individuals had
a continuing need for access to PSP information. The clearance did not
automatically transfer with individuals who moved to new assignments.
The clearance had to be re—justiﬁed for the new position, or the individual
would be debriefed from the Program.

TOP SECRET/ASH. W//COMINT/0RCON/NOFORN

26

TOP SE CRE T //.S' T L W//COMINT/0RCON/NOFORN

WORKING DRAFT

(U) FOUR: NSA PRIVATE SECTOR RELATIONSHIPS

(TS/ISt/fNF) To conduct foreign intelligence-gathering activities
under the PSF,’ NSA required the assistance of private companies,
which provided access to international communications chokepoints
in United States. immediately after 11 September 2001, some private
companies contacted NSA to oﬁ'er support. Subsequent to PSP
authorization, NSA sent request letters to companies stating that
their assistance was authorized by the President with legal
concurrence of the Attorney General.

(U) Need for Private Sector Cooperation

 

(TSI/SI/fNF) The United States carries cut foreign intelligence activities
through a variety of means. One of the most effective means is to partner
with commercial entities to obtain access to information that would not
otherwise be available.

(U/IFOUO) Telephony

(TS/{SU/NF) Most international telephone calls are routed through a small
number of switches or “chokepoints” in the international telephone
switching system on route to their ﬁnal destination. The United States is a
major crossroads for international switched telephone trafﬁc. For example,
in 2003, circuit switches worldwide carried approximately 130 billion
minutes of telephone communications. Twenty percent of this amount,
over 37 billion minutes, either originated or terminated in the United
States, and another thirteen percent, over 23 billion minutes, transited the
United States (neither originating nor terminating here). [NSA is
authorized under Executive Order 12333 to acquire transiting telephone
calls]

(TS/[SHIN F) NSA determined that under the Authorization it could gain
access to approximately 81% of the international calls into and out of the
United States through three corporate partners: COMPANY A had access to
39%, COMPANY B 23%, and COMPANY C 14%. NBA did not seek
assistance from local exchange carriers, because that would have given
NSA access primarily to domestic calls.

TOP SE CRE Tf/S TL Wf/C OMIN 7701? C ONﬂV 0F ORN

27

TOP SE CRE T //S T L W//COMINT/0R C ONAN 0F ORN

S1109-0002
WORKING DRAFT

{U/IFOUO) internet Communications

(TSiiSIii'NF) Al Qaeda and associated terrorist organizations have made
extensive use of the Internet. It is their preferred method of
communication. Terrorists use Internet communications, particularly web
based services, because they are ubiquitous, anonymous, and usually free
of charge. They can access Web~based email acc0unts and similar services
from any origination point around the world.

(TSii SliiN F) The United States is a major Internet communications hub.
The industry standard for characterization of the volume of Internet
communications is bandwidth, which measures the amount of digital data
transmitted in one second — bits per second or bps. For example, data
available from 2002 shows that at that time, worldwide international
bandwidth was slightly more than 290 Gbpsi. Of that total, less than 2.5
Gbps was between two regions that did not include the United States.

(TSiiSIiiN F) The United States is also home to computer servers providing
Internet communications services often used by terrorists. The majority of
known terrorist email addresses that NSA has tracked are hosted on U.S.-
based providers or foreign-managed providers hosted on servers in the

United States- tag-—
—-

(UiiFOUO) Evolution of NSA Partnerships with Private Sector

 

(U) History of NSA Partnerships with Private Sector

(TS/’iSI/iN F) As far back as World War II, NSA has had classiﬁed
relationships with carefully vetted U.S. companies that assist with essential
foreign intelligence-gathering activities. NSA maintains relationships with
over 100 U.S. companies. Without their cooperation, NSA would not be
able respond to intelligence requirements on a variety of topics important
to the United States.

(TSii SIiiN F) Two of the most productive SIG INT collection partnerships
that NSA has with the private sector are with COMPANY A and
COMPANY B. These two relationships enable NSA to access large
volumes of foreign-to-foreign communications transiting the United States

T(U) prs is an abbreviation for Gigabits per second, which can also be described as one billion bits per second
or 1,000,000,000 bps.

TOP SE CRE T //S TL W//COMINT/0R CONWOFORN

28

TOP SE C RE T//S T L W/fCOMIN T/OR C ONXN OF ORN

WORKING DRAFT

through fiber-optic cables, gateway switches, and data networks. They also
provide foreign intelligence authorized under the FlSA.

(TS/ISU/NF) According to General Alexander, General Hayden’s
replacement as Director ofNSA/CSS, if the relationships with these
companies were ever terminated, the US. SlGIN'I‘ system would be
irrevocably damaged, because NSA would have sacriﬁced America’s home
ﬁeld advantage as the primary hub fer worldwide telecommunications.

(U) Partnerships after 11 September 2001

(TS/{Sll/NF) According to the former Deputy Chief of 880, between 11
September 2001 and the 4 October 2001 Authorization, COMPANY A and
COMPANY B contacted NSA and asked “what can we do to help?”
COMPANY B personnel approached NSA 830 personnel thr0ugh an
existing program. They said they noticed odd patterns in domestic calling
records surrounding the events of l 1 September and offered call records
and analysis. With no appropriate authority under which to accept the call
records, NSA suggested the company contact the FBI.

(UIIFOUD) Partnerships Supporting the PSP

 

(TS/ISI/INF) Once the Authorization was signed on 4 October 200], NSA
began a process of identifying and visiting commercial entities requesting
their support. While requesting help from corporate entities to support the
PSP, NSA personnel made it clear that the PSP was a cooperative program
and participation was voluntary. NSA knew that the PSP was an
extraOrdinary program and understood if companies viewed it as too much
of a liability.

(TS/ISI/INF) NSA Approaches to Private Sector Companies

(TSf/ SI/fN F) 2001: On Columbus Day, 8 October 2001, NSA Special
Source Operations (SSO) perscmnel responsible for the access relationships
with corporate partners COMPANY A, COMPANY B, and COMPANY C
were called in to work and informed that the President had authorized the
PSP on 4 October 2001. The 530 personnel were tasked with initiating a
dialog with the respective TSISCI-cleared officials from COMPANIES A,
B, and C to seek their ecoperation under the new Authorization. Over the
next few business days, 380 personnel met separately with officials from
the three companies. Each company agreed to cooperate.

TOP S E CRE T/VS TL W/lCOMIN TXOR C ONW 0F URN

29

S3109-0002
WORKING DRAFT

TOP SE CRE T//S T L W//COMINT/0RCON/WDFORN

(TSf/SI/IN F) Upon conﬁrmation that formal NSA letters requesting their
assistance were forthcoming, the providers, acting independently and
officially unaware of the cooperating agreements with other companies,
initiated collection to support the PSP.

(TSI/SWN F) 2002: In early 2002, NSA 380 personnel met with the Senior
Vice President of Government Systems and other employees from
COMPANY E. Under the authority of the PSP, NSA asked COMPANY E
to provide call detail records (CDR) in support of security for the 2002
Olympics in Salt Lake City. On 1] February 2002, the company’s CEO
agreed to cooperate with NSA. On 19 February 2002, COMPANY E
submitted a written proposal that discussed methods it could use to
regularly replicate call record information stored in a COMPANY E facility
and potentially forward the same information to NBA. Discussions with
COMPANY E continued in 2003. However, the COMPANY B General
Counsel ultimately decided not to support NSA.

(TSUSI/INF) On 5 September 2002, NBA legal and operational personnel
met with internet provider COMPANY D’s General Counsel to discuss the
PSP and ask for the company‘s support. COMPANY D provided support,
but it was minimal. (For a description of COMPANY D’s support, see
page _, “What Providers Fumished.").

{TS/ISl/INF) On 29 October 2002, NSA legal and operational personnel
met with internet provider COMPANY F ’s Legal and Corporate Affairs
personnel, and a former NSA OGC employee hired by COMPANY F as
independent counsel. NSA requested COMPANY F’s support under the
PSP for email content. At the meeting, COMPANY F requested a letter
from the Attorney General certifying the legality of the PSP. In December
2002, NSA’s Commercial Technologies Group was informed that the
company’s CEO agreed to support the PSP. According to NSA’s General
Counsel, COMPANY F did not participate in the PSP because of corporate
liability concerns.

(TS/lSl/INF) 2003: In April 2003, NSA legal and Operational personnel
met with the President and Chief Operating Officer, General Counsel, and
other personnel from private sector COMPANY G. After the meeting, the
company’s General Counsel wanted to seek the opinion of outside counsel.
NSA determined the risk associated with additional disclosure outweighed
what COMPANY G would have provided. NSA decided to not pursue a
partnership with this company.

TOP S E C RE Tf/S TL W//COMINT/OR CONWOFDRN

30

TOP S E CRE T/lS TL W//COMIN T/OR CONWOFORN

WORKING DRAFT

(Ul/FOUO) NSA Letters to Private Sector

(TSf/SWNF) The Director sent letters to private sector companies
requesting their assistance with the PSP, NSA OGC drafted the letters for
the Director, tracked each renewal of the President‘sguthorization and
modiﬁed the letters accordingly, and ensured the letters were delivered to
the companies. Between 16 October 2001 and 14 December 2006, NBA
Sent 147 request—for—assistance letters to private sector partners.

Ii] COMPANY A: 44 Letters
IE COMPANY B: 44 Letters
m COMPANY C: 46 Letters
E COMPANY D: 11 Letters
COMPANY E: 2 Letters

(TS/ISI-ECI/INF) 2001. In his ﬁrst PSP-related letter on 16 October 2001
to COMPANIES A, B and C, General Hayden stated that the National
Security Agency and the Federal Bureau of Investigation required their
assistance “to collect intelligence vital to the national security arising from
the events of ii September 200] ,” and speciﬁcally requested that they
“provide survey, tasking and collection against international traffic, some
of which terminates in the United States; provide aggregated call record
information; and supply computer to computer data which can be used to
determine the communicants.” Their assistance was “needed to identify
members of international terrorist cells in the United States and prevent
future terrorist attacks against the United States." These ﬁrst letters also
stated that the requested assistance was authorized by the President with
the legal concurrence of the Attorney General, pursuant to Article II of the
Constitution.

(TS/ISI-ECI/IN F) 2002: Subsequent letters were sent to COMPANIES A,
B, and C by General Hayden (or his deputy) each time the President
reauthOrized the PSP. Throughout 2002, these written requests for
assistance referenced the 16 October letter; repeated the need to provide
the Presidentially-authorized assistance; emphasized that such assistance
was necessary to counter a future terrorist attack; and stated that such
assistance was reviewed by the Attorney General and had been determined
to be a lawful exercise of the President’s powers as Commander-in-Chief.
Starting in mid~2003, the wording of the letters was revised but in
substance remained the same.

(TS/ISI-ECII/NF) Two request letters for assistance were sent to private
sector COMPANY E. The first letter was sent on 26 February 2002, and

TOP SECRET/VS TL W//COMINT/’0R CON/NOFORN

31

S 7109-0002
WORKING DRAFT

TOP SE CRE T/lS TL W/fCOMIN T XOR C ON/N 0F ORN

the last letter was sent on 14 March 2002. All letters were signed by
General Hayden.

(TS/ISl-ECl/INF) In additiOn to the letters sent to COMPANY A,
COMPANY B, COMPANY C and COMPANY E, eleven request letters for
assistance were prepared for intemet provider COMPANY D. The ﬁrst
letter was on 9 October 2002 and the last letter was 11 September 2003.
All letters were signed by General Hayden or his designee.

(TS/fSl-Ele/N F) 2003: In June 2003, COMPANY C’s General Counsel
and Chief of Staﬁ‘ requested a written Attorney General opinion on the
legality and lawfulness of the PSP, to include a directive to comply.
COMPANY C cited corporate liability concerns as their reason. On 8
August 2003, the Attorney General sent COMPANY C a letter stating that
the request for support was a lawful exercise of authorities assigned to the
President under Article II of the Constitution. Additionally, the Attorney
General directed COMPANY C to comply with NSA’s request.

(TS/ISI-ECI/fNF) 2004: On 26 March 2004, the President amended his 11
March 2004 authorization after deciding to discontinue bulk collection of
Internet metadata. Before I] March 2004, all authorizations covering
Internet metadata collection (as well as content collection and telephony
metadata collection) were approved for form and legality by the Attorney
General. Accordingly, NSA’s 12 March 2004 letters to the companies
stated that the most recent authorization had been approved for form and
legality by the Counsel to the President, not the Attorney General as with
previous authorizations.

(TS/ISl/IECI/INF) 2005: Beginning 19 September 2005 through 14
December 2006, new NSAJCSS Director General Alexander, or his
designee, signed the request letters to the companies.

(TS/lSI-ECI/I'NF) 2006 Attorney General Letters. On 24 January 2006,
the Attorney General sent letters to COMPANIES A, B, and C, certifying
under 18 U.S.C. 2511(2)(a)(ii)(B] that “no warrant or court order was or is
required by law for the assistance, that all statutory requirements have been
met, and that the assistance has been and is required.”

(TS/ISI—ECI/INF) 2006 DNI Letters. On 13 April 2006, the Director of
National Intelligence (DNI) sent letters to Companies A, B, and C to
underscore the continuing critical importance of their assistance. The DNI
letter also stated that the “intelligence obtained from their assistance has
been and continues to be indispensable to protecting the country and the
American people from terrorist attacks."

TOP SECRE T//S TL WHCOMIN T/ORCONWOFORN

32

TOP SE CRE T/x’S TL W/VC‘OMIN T /0RC (IN/W 0F URN

WORKING DRAFT

(TS/ISI-ECII/NF) Letters for COMPANIES A, B, C, and B were couriened
to the companies’ local facility. COMPANY B sometimes picked up its
letters at NSA Headquarters. Letters for COMPANY D were stored at NSA
since no one at the company had the proper clearance to store them.

(U/IFOUO) PSP Authorized Support to NSA

(TS/ISI-ECII/N F) Private sector companies provided assistance to NBA
under the PSP in three categories: telephone and Internet Protocol content,
Metadata from Call Detail Records, and Internet Protocol Metadata.

(TS/{ECI/INF) The PSP allowed content to be collected if the selected
communication was one-end foreign or the location of the communicants
could not be determined. Selectors (email addresses and telephone
numbers) were provided by NSA’s Ofﬁce of CounterterroriSm.

(TS/{Sl-ECI/INF) Content: Telephony. Under the PSP, companies
provided the content of onewend-foreign international telephone calls
(telephony content) and the content of electronic communications (email
content) of a1 Qacda and its afﬁliates. COMPANIES A, B, and C provided
telephOny content from communications links they owned and operated.
They had been providing telephony content to NBA before 2001 under
FISA and 13.0. 12333 authorities. NSA began to receive telephony content
from COMPANIES A and B on 6 October 2001 and COMPANY C on 7
October 2001. This support ended on 17 January 2007.

(TS/I‘Sl-ECI/INF) Content: Internet Email. COMPANIES A, B, and C
provided access to the content of Al Qaeda and Al Qaedawaﬁiliate email
from communication links they owned and operated. NSA received email
content from COMPANY A as early as October 2001 until 17 January
2007, from Company B beginning February—March 2002 through 17
January 2007, and from COMPANY C from April 2005 until 17 January
2007. From April 2003 through November 2003, COMPANY D provided
a limited amount of email content under the PSP. It did not provide PSP-
related support after November 2003, but it did provide support under

F ISA.

(TS/{SI-ECl/INF) Metadata from Call Detail Records. COMPANIES A
and B provided Call Detail Records to NSA. The records were usod by
NSA Counter-Terrorism metadata analysts to perform call chaining and
network reconstruction between known al Qaeda and al Qaeda-affiliate
telephone numbers and previously unknown telephone numbers with which
they had been in contact. Providers generated Call Detail Records as a
normal course of doing business (e.g., billing purposes and traffic

T HP SE CRE T/x’S T L WIVCOMINT/ORCONWOFORN

33

SIT-010002
WORKING DRAFT

TOP S E C R E T//S TL W//COMINT/0R CON/NOFORN

engineering). Records included all call events from the companies’ long
distance and international communication networks. The Call Detail
Records were aggregated as large files by TS/SCl—cleared groups at
COMPANY A and COMPANY B and forwarded, on an hourly or daily
basis, across classified communications circuits to a PSPFrestricted NSA
data repository.

COMPANY A provided PSP-authorized CDRs as early as November 2001,
and COMPANY B began to provide CDRs in February 2002. Both
continued to provide this support through the end of the PSP, and support
continues today under the FISC Business Records Order. COMPANY C
provided select PEP-authorized CDRs from December 2002 through March
2003.

(TS/ISIHECIl/NF) Internet Metadata. The last category of private sector
assistance was access to Internet Protocol (11") metadata associated with
communications of al Qaeda (and affiliates) frorn data links owned or
operated by COMPANIES A, B, and C. in order to be a candidate for PSP
IP metadata collection, data links were first vetted to ensure that the
preponderance of communications was from foreign sources, and that there
was a high probability of collecting al Qaeda (and affiliate)
communications. NSA took great care to ensure that metadata was
produced against foreign, not domestic, communications.

(TSf/SI-ECif/NF) COMPANY A began providing PSP IP metadata
collection as early as November 2001. Although COMPANY B began
providing CD—ROMs of PSP lP metadata in October 2001, an automated
transfer of data was not available until February-March 2002. The
Presidential authority to collect IP metadata was terminated in March 2004.
COMPANY A and COMPANY B [P metadata collection resumed after the
FISC Pen Register/T rap 8r. Trace (PRJTT) Order authorizing this activity
was signed on 15 July 2004. COMPANY C provided 1P metadata
beginning in April 2005.

TOP SE CRE T KS TL Wf/COMIN T/ORC‘ONWOFDRN

34

TOP SE CRE T/fS T L W//COMINT/0R CONWOFORN

WORKING DRAFT

This page intentionally left blank.

TOP SE CRE T//S T L W//COMIN T /0RC DN/N 0F GEN

35

TOP S E C'RE T /A5' TL W/XCDMINT/ORCON/NOFORN

S 7109-0002
WORKING DRAFT

(U) FIVE: NSA’S INTERACTION WITH THE FISO AND
TRANSITION TO COURT ORDERS

(TS/fSl/WF) Until 2006, NSA’s PSP-related interaction with members of
the FlSC was limited to informational brieﬁngs to the Chief Judge. Chief
Judge Royce Lamberth, Judge Colleen Kollar-Koteily, who replaced Judge
Lamberth as Chief Judge in May 2002, and one law clerk were the only
members of the FiSC that NSA had briefed on the PSP. ln the spring of
2004, NSA’s interaction with Judge Kollar—Kotelly increased as NBA and
Dad began transitioning PSP-authorized activities to FiSC orders in 2004.
it was not until after parts of the PSP were publicly revealed in

December 2005 that all members of the FlSC were briefed on the
Program.

(U) NSA’s Interaction with the HBO

 

(TSl/SI/iNF) General Hayden stated that from the start of the PSP, he and
other NSA leaders recognized the importance of keeping all thme branches
of the Government informed of the Program and pressed the White House
to do so.

(TS/lSllfNF) In all of its interactions, neither NSA nor DoJ presented
before the F ISC the factual and legal issues arising from the PSP in any
case or controversy. Therefore, the FISC did not express any View or
comment on the legality or illegality of the PSP.

(Ul/FOUO) NSA Brieﬁngs on the PSP to Members of the FISC

(TS/lSIilNF) The White House first permitted NSA to brief the Chief Judge
of the F130 in January 2002. General Hayden stated that en 31 January
2002, he provided Judge Lamberth a very detailed PSP brieﬁng, and the
Deputy AssistantAttorney General in the DoJ OLC explained the
Program’s legality. General Hayden stated that this brieﬁng was prompted
by a concern expressed by DOJ that PSP-derived infonnation would be
used in PISA applications

('l'S/lSIilNF) On 17 May 2002, General Hayden briefed incoming Chief
Judge Kollar—Kotelly, with Judge Lambeth in attendance, on the PSP. In a

TOP SE CRE T //S TL Wf/COMINT/OR CONWOFORN

3d

TOP SE CRE T/fS T L W/fC'OMIN T /0R C ONW 0F ORN

WORKING DRAFT

letter to the Counsel for Intelligence Policy dated 12 January 2005, Judge
Kollar—Kotelly stated that, on that date, she was also ShOWn a short legal
memorandum, prepared by the Deputy Assistant Attorney General in the
DoJ, OLC, that set out a broad overview of the legal authority for
conducting the PSP. Judge Kollar—Kotelly added that she was allowed to
read the memorandum but not to retain it for study.

(TS/ISIl/NF) NSA records show that Judge KoilaruKotelly was briefed
again on 12 August 2002 at the White House. Although we found no
documentation of the purpose of the meeting or topics discussed, Judge
Kollar—Kotelly stated in the January 2005 letter to the Counsel for
Intelligence Policy that, at her request, she was permitted to review the
Authorization of the PSP on that date.

(TS/JSl/INF) In response to a New York Times “warrantiess wiretapping”
story published in December 2005, General Alexander briefed all FISC
members on the PSP on 9 January 2006.9

(U) Transition of PSP Authorities to FISC Orders

 

(TS/lSI/INF) The transition of PSPuauthorized activities to FISC orders
was precipitated by preliminary results of DoJ OLC legal review of the
components of the Program. In March 2004, OLC found three of the four
types ofeolleotion authorized under the PSP to be legally supportable.
However, it determined that, given the method of collection, bulk Internet
metadata was prohibited by the terms of F ISA and Title III.lo
Consequently, the White House Counsel rather than the Attorney General
signed the 11 March 2004 Authorization.

 

   

 

 

(T5/f5ﬂ/NF) NSA' Implements Controversial

9 (TEX/STLWl/SI/IORINFMudge Scullin did not attend this brieﬁng, but was later briefed on 3| January 2006.
Judge Bates, a new judge, was briefed on 21 March 2006.

‘°(TS//STLW!/SI//0R/NF) OLC ultimately issued three opinions: 15 March 2004, 6 May 2004, and 16 July
2004.

TOP SE CRE Tf/S TL Wf/COMINT/ORCONWOFORN

37

51109-0002
WORKING DRAFT

TOP SECRE Tﬂ'S TL W//COMI N Tr’OR CON/N 0F URN

 

 

(TS/fSII/NF) Until March 2004, NSA considered its
collection of bulk lnternet metadata under the PSP to be
legal and appropiiate. Speciﬁcally NSA leadership,
including OGC lawyers and the lG, interpreted the terms of
the Authorization to allow NSA to obtain bulk Internet
metadata for analysis because NSA did not actually
“acquire” communications until specific communications
were selected. in other words, because the Authorization
permitted NSA to conduct metadata analysis on selectors
that met certain criteria, it implicitly authorized NSA to
obtain the bulk data that was needed to conduct the
metadata analysis.

(TS/fSl/WF) On 11 March 2004, General Hayden had to
decide whether NSA would execute the Authorization
without the Attorney General‘s signature {iV-A/32-11}.
General Hayden described a conversation in which David
Addington asked, "ill/ill you do it (lV-A/SE— 11)?" At that time,
General Hayden also said that he asked Daniel Levin,
Counsel to the Attorney General, in March 2004 it he
needed to stop anything he was doing. Mr. Levin said that
he did not need to stop anything (lV-A/32-7 and lV—A/32a-
?&8). Alter conferring with NSA Operational and legal
personnel, General Hayden stated that he decided to
continue the PSP because 1) the members of Congress he
briefed the previous day, 10 March, were supportive of
continuing the Program, 2) he knew the value of the
Program. and 3) NSA lawyers had determined the Program
was legal.

 

(TSllSi/KNF) Eight days later on 19 March 2004, the President rescinded the
authority to collect bulk Internet metadata and gave NBA one week to stop
collection and block access to previously collected bulk lntemet metadata. NBA
did so on 26 March 2004. To close the resulting collection gap, 130.] and NSA
immediately began efforts to recreate this authority in what became the PRlTT
order. By January 2007, the remaining three authorities had also been replicated in
FISC orders: the Business Records (BR) Order, the Foreign Content Order, and the

TOP SECRE T 156' T L W//COMINT/0RCON/NOFORN

33

TOP SECRE T/fS TL W//COMIN TXOR CONWOFORN

WORKING DRAFT

Domestic Content Order. On 1 February 2007, the ﬁnal Authorization was allowed
to expire and was not renewed.

(TSI/SIIINF) Transition of Internet Metadata Collection to Pen Register/Trap
and Trace Order Authority

(TS/{SWNIU According to NSA personnel, the decision to transition
Internet metadata collection to a FISC order was driven by DoJ. At a
meeting on 26 March 2007, 130.1 directed NSA representatives from OGC
and SID to ﬁnd a legal basis, using a FISC order, to recreate NSA’s PSP
authority to collect bulk Internet metadata.

(TS/JSI/INF) After extensive coordination, D01 and NSA devised the
PRJTT theory to which the Chief Judge of the FISC seemed amenable.
DoJ and NSA worked closely over the following months, exchanging
drafts of the application, preparing declarations, and responding to
questions from court advisers. NSA representatives explained the
Capabilities that were needed to recreate the Authority, and DoJ personnel
devised a workable legal basis to meet those needs. In April 2004, NSA
briefed Judge Kollar-Kotelly and a law clerk because Judge Kollar—Kotelly
was researching the impact of using PSP-derived information in FISA
applications. In May 2004, NSA personnel provided a technical brieﬁng
on NSA collection of bulk Internet metadata to Judge Kollar-Kotelly. In
addition, General Hayden said he met with Judge Kollar-Kotelly on two
Successive Saturdays during the summer of 2004 to discuss the on-going
eﬁons.

(TS/J’SIIINF) The F lSC signed the first PRfIT order on 14 July 2004.
Although NSA lost access to the bulk metadata from 26 March 2004 until
the order was signed, the order essentially gave NSA the same authority to
collect bulk Internet metadata that it had under the PSP, except that it
speciﬁed the datalinks from which NSA could collect, and it limited the
number of people that could access the data. The FISC continues to renew
the PR/TT approximately every 90 days.

(T S/lSl/INF) Transition of Telephony Metadata Collection to the Business
Records Order

(TSI/SI/INF) According to NBA General Counsel Vito Potenza, the
decision to transition telephony metadata to the Business Records Order
was driven by a private sector company. After the New York Times article
was published in December 2005, Mr. Potenza stated that one of the PSP
providers expressed concern about providing telephony metadata to NSA
under Presidential Authority without being compelled. Although OLC’s

TOP SE CRE T f/S TL Wf/C OMIN 7701? C ON/N 0F GEN

39

S 7109-0002
WORKING DRAFT

TOP SE CRE T/AS' TL W//COMINT/0R CONWOFORN

May 2004 Opinion states that NSA collection of telephony metadata as
business records under the Authorization was legally supportable, the
provider preferred to be compelled to do so by a court order.”

(TS/fSl/fNF) As with the PR/TT Order, D01 and NSA collaboratively
designed the application, prepared declarations, and responded to questions
from court advisers. Their previous experience in drafting the PRTT Order
made this process more efﬁcient.

(TS/{SIf/NF) The FISC signed the ﬁrst Business Records Order on 24 May
2006. The order essentially gave NSA the same authority to collect bulk
telephony metadata from business records that it had under the PSP. And,
unlike the PRTT, there was no break in collection at transition. The order
did, however, limit the number of people that could access the data and
required more stringent oversight by and reporting to DOJ. The FISC
continues to renew the Business Records Order every 90 days or so. (See
Appendix H.)

(TS/ISMNF) Transition of internet and Telephony Content Collection to the
Foreign and Domestic Content Orders

(TS/ISl/IN F) According to NBA OGC, the transition of PSP content
collection to FISC orders was driven by Do]. 130.] had contemplated a
transition in July 2004 when the F lSC’s signing of the PR/TT order
indicated its willingness to authorize PSP activities under court order.
Given this precedent, Do] concluded the FISC might also accept content
collection. However, little progress was made until June 2005 when the
DoJ OIPR with NSA DOE and SID representatives began researching the
feasibility of collecting PSI" content under court order. In essence, DOJ
and NSA needed to ﬁnd a legal theory that would allow NSA to add and
drop thousands of foreign targets for content collection. Because the law
was more restrictive for content than metadata, NSA had serious
reservations about whether it would be possible to ﬁnd a workable solution
using a FISC order at that time, especially given the large number of
selectors to be tasked and the complexity from legal and operational
perspectives. For example:

“(TS/[STLWHSIHOR/NF) In addition to the telephony metdata that NSA was receiving from private sector
companies as business records, it was also obtaining “live” telephony metadata from its own SIGINT
collection sources. It continued until mid—2005. (“*We will include a reference to the corresponding

notiﬁcation here.***)

TOP SE CRE T//S TL Wf/COMINT/ORCON/NOFORN

40

TOP SE CRE T/fS T L W/fCOMIN T /0R CON/N 0F URN

WORKING DRAFT

(TS/ISll/NF) NSA risked losing ﬂexibility in the means of
collection, given that facilities and collection accesses were
complex and in constant ﬂux.

(TSI/SUINF) In executing the PRJTT and Business Records Orders,
the FlSC’s and DoJ’s consistently increasing demands for
information took NSA analysts away from target-related duties.

(TS/lSlf/NF) The process imposed by the FISA statute was not able
to handle the large volume ofNSA requests for FlSC authorization
needed after
11 September 2001.

(TS/ISWNF) Because OLC’s May 2004 opinion found that the
existing Authorization for content collection was lawful, there was
no pressing need to find an alternative legal vehicle.

(TS/ISU/NF) In a letter dated 21 February 2006, the NSA GC expressed the
aforementioned concerns, among others, to the Acting Assistant Attorney
General suggesting that:

“ . . . . now might be the right time to seek substantial revisions to
the FISA. The purpose of the legislation was to protect the
privacy of U.S. persons who could be subjected to surveillance,
either intentionally or incidentally. Twenty-seven years later, the
United States Government ﬁnds itself obtaining FISA orders so
that it can carry out surveillance on foreign intelligence targets
who are outside the United States and, more often than not,
communicating only with others outside the United States. This
serves no U.S. person’s privacy interests, was never anticipated by
the statute’s drafters, and diverts valuable resources from the fight
against terrorism. The FISA needs to be simpliﬁed and
streamlined."

(TS/ISI/I'NF) Ultimately, Do] decided to pursue a FlSC order for content
collection wherein the traditional FISA deﬁnition of a “facility” as a
specific telephone number or email address was changed to encompass the
gateway or cable head that foreign targets use for communications.
Minimization and probable cause standards would then be applied. As
with the PRTT and Business Records orders, NSA collaborated with Do] to
prepare the application and declarations and provided the operational
requirements needed to continue effective surveillance.

(TS/fSI/INF) After 18 months of concerted effort and coordination, the
F150 ultimately accepted the theory for foreign selectors but rejected it for

T HP SE CRE T//S T L W/fC OMIN T XOR CON/N 0F ORN-

41

Sﬁﬂ9~0002
WORKING DRAFT

TOP SE CRE T f/S TL W//COM1N T/ORC DIV/W 0F ORN

domestic selectors. Consequently, on 10 January 2007, the FISC signed
two separate orders: the Foreign Content Order and the Domestic Content
Order.

(TS/{SI/KNF) The Foreign Content Order negatively affected SIGINT
exploitation. Most notably, the number offerelgn selectors on collection
dmpped by 73 percent, from 11,000 selectors under PSP to 3,000 under the
order. In addition, the administrative workload for NSA analysts to put
critical foreign selectors 0n collection was so burdensome that the order
became operationally unsustainable. The order was eventually superseded
by Congress’ FISA modernization. It was temporarily replaced by the
Protect America Act in August 2007 and then permanently replaced by the
FISA Amendments Act in July 2008.

(TS/fSl/INF) The Domestic Content Order did not create a similar loss in
collection because so few domestic numbers were tasked at that time. It
did, however, slow operations because of the documentation required, and
it took considerably longer to task under the order than under the PSP.
Over time, the scope of the Domestic Content Order gradually decreased to
a single selector tasked for collection in January 2009. In January 2009,
the FBI, at NSA’s request, assumed responsibility for the Domestic Content
Order and became the declarant before the FISC.

TOP SECRET/5T1. W//COMINT/0RCON/NOFORN

42

TOP SE CRE T /;’S T L W/fCOMINT/ORCONWOFORN

WORKING DRAFT

(U) SIX: NSA OVERSIGHT OF PSP SIGINT ACTIVITIES

(Uf/FOUO) NSA Ofﬁce of General Counsel and SID, Oversight and
Compliance provided oversight of NSA PSP activities from October 2001
until January 2007. NSA GIG initiated P8P oversight in 2002.

(U) Office of General Counsel

 

(UiiFOUO) The OGC was the ﬁrst NSA organization with oversight
responsibilities to learn of the PSP, and it continued to provide signiﬁcant
oversight ever the life of the Program. The GC was briefed on 4 October
2001, the day the Authorization was signed. On 6 October, he gave the
Director and Deputy Director talking points for brieﬁng NSA personnel on
the new authority. The talking points included the fact that General
Hayden had instructed the GC and the lead attorney for operations to
conduct routine review and oversight of PSP activities.

(Hi/FOLIO) The NSA Assistant General Counsel for Operations provided
most of the Program oversight before the 016 learned of the PSP in 2002.
He and his Successors reviewed preposed target packages and rejected
those not compliant with the Authorization, answered questions, gave
brieﬁngs, reviewed program implementation, and coerdinated program-
related i55ues with DoJ.

(U) SIGINT Directorate

 

(UiiFOUO) The SIGINT Directorate Office of Oversight and Compliance
(0&C) represents the Director NSA/CSS and the Signals Intelligence
Director in overseeing compliance with authorities that govern the
collection, production, and dissemination of intelligence by the National
Security Agency. The Chief of 0&C was briefed on the PSP on 10
October 2001. Initially, 0&C’s ability to provide effective oversight was
limited by insufﬁcient staffing and a lack of methodologies to provide
meaningful oversight of PSP collection. It, therefore, focused on
identifying problem areas while documenting program activity. it also
helped establish database partitions and assisted with data flow compliance
issues to prevent uncleared personnel from seeing Presidentially~authorized
collection. Later, it reviewed justification statements for tasked selectors.
Also, it directed PSP-cleared SIGI'NT operations personnel to follow

TOP S E CRE Tﬁ’S TL Wf/COMINT/ORCONANOFORN

43

TOP SE CRE T/AS' TL W//COMINT/0RCON/NOFORN

S 17-09-0002
WORKING DRAFT

established procedures for the dissemination of US. person information
and obtained approvals to permit dissemination of U.S. person information

(U) Office of Inspector General

 

(U/IFOUO) NSA GIG conducted oversight of PSP activities from August
2002 until the Program ended in January 2007. It issued 12 formal reports
and 14 Presidential Notiﬁcations on PSP activities at NSA.

Investigations were conducted in response to speciﬁc incidents or
violations to determine the cause, effect, and remedy.

Reviews were conducted to determine the adequacy of management
controls to ensure compliance with the Authorization and related
authorities; to assess the efﬁciency and effectiveness in mitigating
higherisk activities associated with the Program; and to identify
impediments to Satisfying the requirements of the Authorization and
related authorities.

Presidential Notiﬁcations were drafted for the Director’s signature
to notify the President’s Caunsel about violations of the
Authorization. (See below for additional details.)

Monthly Due Diligence Meetings were held by program ofﬁcials
to exercise “due diligence” in addressing program issues and
developments. The DIG attended these meetings to stay aware of
program activities.

(U/fFDUD) DIG also provided oversight of FISC-authorized activity
previously conducted under Authorization.

(Ul/FOUO) See Appendix H for a list of OK] reports on PSP activity at
NSA.

TOP SE CRE T //S T L W//COMINT/0RCONWOFORN

44

TOP SE CRE T //’S TL W/YCOMINT/ORCON/WOFORN

WORKING DRAFT

 

(U) NSA [6 Nat Cleared until 2002

(TSI/Sl/WF) We could not determine exact reasons for
why the NSA lG was not cleared for the PSP Until
August 2002. According to the NSA General Counsel,
the President would not allow the it? to be briefed
sooner. General Hayden did not speciﬁcally recall why
the [G was not brought in earlier; but thought that it
had not been appropriate to do so when it was
uncertain how long the Program would last and before
operations had stabilized. The NBA lG pointed out
that he did not take the it? position until April 2002, so
NSA leadership or the White House may have been
resistant to clearing either a new or an acting lG.

(TS/fSl/lNF) Regardless, by August 2002, General
Hayden and the NSA General Counsel wanted to
institutionalize oversight of the Program by bringing in
the lG. General Hayden recalled ha wing to “make a
case" to the White House to clear the lG at that time.

 

 

(U/lFOUO) OlG concerns lead to change

(C) In addition to formal recommendations made in review and
investigative reports, OIG concerns about access to the terms of the
Presidential authorization and about the means of reporting PSP violations
resulted in three major changes.

(C) First, in December 2002, the [G recommended that General Hayden
formally delegate authority to NBA operational personnel, some of whom
had unknowingly violated terms of the Authorization. The Counsel to the
Vice President, demanding secrecy, refused to let them see terms of the
authority, which had been delegated by the President to the Secretary of
Defense, who delegated it to the Director of NSA. General Hayden issued
the ﬁrst “Delegation of Authority” letter to key operational personnel in the
SID on 4 March 2003. Subsequent delegation letters were issued each time
the President renewed the authority.

TOP S E C' R E 77.43 TL W//COMINT/ORCONA’VOFORN

45

S $09-00”
WORKING DRAFT

TOP SE CRE T #8 TL Wf/COMINT/OR CONWOFORN

(C) Second, in March 2003, the IG advised General Hayden that he should
report violations of the Authorization to the President. In February of
2003, the DIG learned of PSP incidents or violations that had not been
reported to overseers as required, because none had the clearance to see the
report.

(TSf/SIIKDC/NF) Before March 2003, NSA quarterly reports on
intelligence activities sent to the President’s intelligence Oversight Board
(through the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for IntelligenCe
Oversight) stated that the Director was not aware of any unlawful
surveillance activities by NSA other than that described in the report.
Beginning in March 2003, at the [Ga direction, NSA quarterly reports
stated that except as disclosed to the President, the Director was not aware
of any unlawful surveillance activities by NSA. Also beginning in March
2003, PSP violations, including those not previously reported to the
intelligence Oversight Board, were reported in “Presidential Notifications.”

(U/fFOUO) Third, shortly after learning about the Program, the 1G
participated in a September 2002 meeting of key cleared personnel at
which important PSP matters were discussed. He recommended that these
types of meetings be held every month. As a result, monthly “due
diligence” meetings were held until the Program ended.

TOP SE CRE TXAS' TL W//C 0M1 N T /0R C ONW 0F URN

46

TOP SECRET/AS TL W//COMINT/0R CONWOFORN

WORKING DRAFT

This page intentionally left blank.

TOP SE CRE Tf/ST L W//COMIN TXORCON/N 0F GEN

47

TOP S E CRE T/lS TL W//C 0M I N TIOR CON/N 0F URN

ST—O9-0002 WORKING DRAFT

WORKING DRAFT

TOP SE CR E Tf/S TL WﬂCOMIN T /0R CON/NOFORN

