It} Sen 2016

CLOSE ACCESS- SIGADS

Clea: Access SIGADE

All |Cluase Aeeess damestie enlleetie-n uses the Eli-3135 SIGAD nith a unique til-'D-lﬂtlﬂ
sufﬁx fe-t' eaeh target lneatiem and ntissinn E'lnse ﬂee-ass nvetseas GENIE enlleetiern has
been assigned the US$1.17 HEAD with a tan-letter snfﬁn

ﬁlate: Targets marl-zed with an "' have either been untapped at am slated te-

ll: dtuiieﬁl iu the neat fuLLLlc- Please tiled-t will]. TAU ETD-R35

'eeatdine anthnrities status}

HEAD [IE—“1126
.‘i-n ffn-t Tar e1. 'L'n-nntt't‘ Lneati an IE as'ett enn Mi ss i an

 

Di: France L'l's' New Tent}: BLACKOUT HIGHLANDS
‘L'C France Cl“; New Tax}; ELACL‘LF DDT VAGRAHT
UC FtaneeEtnb ﬂ'aah. DC WABASH HIGHLAFDS
Ll} France-Emit lFlash. DC “ABA-SH PBX

Ct enetal T enn D e'se tiptinns

H IUH LA. NDE: L'nlle-rtiern frntn Implants

T.~"hGRA."-IT C elleetiern nf Campus e1 Screens

E'IAGHETIC': Sens-2n: Cnileetie-n elf Elagnetie Eman atinns

LHHEESLLJZE- Colleen-an Etan LAT-— Implant

DCEs‘iH- Optical Collection System fen' Raster Based Cnnipnte: Seteens
LleSA‘u'ER . Imaging nfthe H and Diit e

GEE—IE. Multi-staee tlperatiun , jumping, the airgap ete

BLACKHEAET Cnlleetimt frnm an FBI Implant
PBX Public Braneh Eadlange Sis-itch

CRETE] EEAELED Collectan derived from AU: efforts to: enable cnptu

DRDPh-IIRE' passive eelieetinn emf emanatieuns using an antenna
CUSTDHS Custnms nppmtunities (not LLFESA‘UER]

DRDPIHRE laser printer enEIe-rtimt, purer ptnximaE access {"KUT“
implanted]

DEWVS‘IVEEPER E33 (Universal Serial Bus} hardwale hast tap that provides
C'DE'ERT lint-c: nt'er "USE link into a target neuter}:
DPCIE‘IES w RF ICIE‘.‘ subsystem to provide wireless
Bridge 'an target rams-nth;

RADDN Hui-directiunal hast tap that can inject Ethernet packets unto the
same target. Aﬂuu's bi-directicnal enplo'ttatien cf
Denied netﬁ'nrks using standard DI‘L-‘ﬂE'l' tee-Es

 

Document interne de la NSA sur l'espionnage visant la France
2 pages — Contributed by Martin Untersinger , Le Monde — Oct 18, 2013

 

Ce terme désigne ta classification utiZisee par fa NSA pour répertoréer ses dispositéfs d'interception et de surveiliance. (p. 1}

iICiADs

 

 

Les programmes visant Ea France son? decrits un peu pius has sur la page. (p. 1)

{IGHLANDS
(AURA) '1'
{IGHLAXDS
3 {IX

 

 

Descriptions des techniques d'irzterception (p. 1}

L'- cnrral Tenn Des; :Lptious

ll s'agit de la Iiste des techniques utilisées de maniere generate par la NSA pour son espionnage. et non de celles visant
specifiquement la France. Les techniques utilisees contre la France portent le nom de Highland. Vagrant e! PBX.

 

 

 

 

 

NSA planted bugs at Indian missions in D.C., U.N.

Shobhan Saxena

 

 

 

 

mm mm

The NSA selected India’s U.N. office and the embassy as “location target" for infiltrating with hi-tech bugs, which might have given them AP
access to vast quantities of Internet traffic. File photo.

They were penetrated by NSA bugs that can copy entire hard disks

Two of the most important nerve-centres of Indian diplomacy outside the country — the Permanent Mission of India
at the United Nations and the embassy in Washington, DC — were targets of such sophisticated bugs implanted by
the US. National Security Agency (NSA) that entire computer hard disks might have been copied by the American
agency. The UN. Mission building in New York and the embassy premises, including its annex, in Washington were
on a top-secret list of countries and missions — many of them European allies of the US. — chosen for intensive
spying.

According to a top-secret NSA document obtained by The Hindu, the NSA selected India’s U.N. office and the
embassy as “location target” for infiltrating their computers and telephones with hi-tech bugs, which might have
given them access to vast quantities of Internet traffic, e-mails, telephone and office conversations and even official
documents stored digitally.

Since the NSA revelations began in June, U.S. President Barack Obama and other top American officials have all
claimed that the surveillance activities were aimed exclusively at preventing terrorist attacks. But the targeted spying
of Indian diplomatic buildings could have been done for political and commercial reasons — not the core
responsibility of the NSA.

According to the 2010 COMINT (communication intelligence) document about “Close Access SIGADs”, the offices of
Indian diplomats and high-ranking military officials stationed at these important posts were targets of four different
kinds of electronic snooping devices:

Lifesaver, which facilitates imaging of the hard drive of computers
Highlands, which makes digital collection from implants

Vagrant, which collects data of open computer screens, and
Magnetic, which is a collection of digital signals

All the Indian “targets” in the list are marked with an asterisk, which, according to the document, means that they
“have either been dropped or are slated to be dropped in the near future.” The NSA document doesn’t say when and
how the bugs were implanted or how much of data was lifted from Indian offices, but all of them were on the “target”
list for more than one t e of data collection bus.

 

Asked by The Hindu, why India’s UN. mission and embassy, which clearly pose no terrorism threat to the US, were
targeted by the NSA, a spokesman for the Office of the Director of National Intelligence said: “The US. government
will respond through diplomatic channels to our partners and allies. While we are not going to comment publicly on
every specific alleged intelligence activity, as a matter of policy we have made clear that the United States gathers
foreign intelligence of the type gathered by all nations. We value our cooperation with all countries on issues of
mutual concern.”

But the spokesman didn’t answer The Hindu’s specific questions about why the top-secret document about spying
on Indian missions shouldn’t be revealed or “reproduced by this newspaper in full or part”.

The document obtained by The Hindu reveals a scary scenario of breach of official secrecy of Indian missions and
violation of privacy of Indian diplomats and other staff working in the three premises that were targeted.

Located between 2nd and 3rd Avenue on 43rd Street in the eastern part of Manhattan, the office of India’s permanent
representative to the UN was on top of the list of Indian targets. Designed by the legendary Indian architect, Charles
Correa, the building with a red granite base and a double-height penthouse porch at the top has the offices of India’s
permanent representative, deputy permanent representative, a minister and political coordinator, six counsellors, a
Colonel-rank military advisor and several other secretaries who look after different areas of India’s engagement with
the world.

It was this building that was the main target of all four NSA bugs: from Lifesaver, which can send to the NSA copies
of everything saved on the hard drives of office computers, to Vagrant, which can pick data straight from computer
screens.

Though emails sent to India’s New York mission have remained unanswered so far, an Indian diplomat told The
Hindu that the NSA eavesdropping might have done “extensive damage” to India’s stand on many international
issues ranging from UN Security Council reforms to peacekeeping operations. “If they could implant bugs inside
communications equipment of European Union office here and tap into their communications cables as well, there is
no reason to believe that they didn’t snoop on us,” said the diplomat, speaking strictly on condition of anonymity. “We
are still assessing the damage. If they managed to copy our hard drives, nothing is left to imagination.”

Second to the UN mission on the “target” list was the chancery building of the Indian Embassy located at 2107,
Massachusetts Avenue in Washington, DC. Consisting of two adjacent buildings, one constructed in 1885 and the
other in 1901, the chancery has offices of the Indian ambassador, the deputy chief of mission, several ministers and
counsellors who head political, economic, defence and industry sections and three Defence Attaches representing
the Indian Army, Air Force and Navy. This building, from where India maintains its diplomatic, trade and strategic ties
with the US, was on the “target” list for three bugs that can make images of hard drives, pick digital signals and
copy data of computer screens.

The third Indian building targeted by the NSA is the embassy annex located on 2536, Massachusetts Avenue in
Washington, DC. The annex has three very important departments: the consular section, headed by a minister, looks
after visa services; the commerce department, also headed by a minister, is involved in a broad range of trade
issues and negotiations besides assisting the Indian businesses; and an office of the Indian Space Research
Organization (ISRO), represented by a counsellor, takes care of cooperation between two countries in the field of
space. This building was on the NSA “target” list for Highlands and Vagrant, which collect data from implants and
computer screens respectively. It’s important to recall here that India’s space programme was targeted by another
NSA tool PRISM, which intercepts and collects actual content on internet and telephone networks (as reported by
The Hindu on Tuesday).

But officials at the Indian embassy claim that the premises are safe. “Adequate measures are in place in this regard
and all steps taken to safeguard the national interest,” wrote an official in an email response to queries by The
Hindu. Though no Indian official was willing to talk on record specifically about the NSA bugs mentioned in the top
secret document, in private they admitted that it’s a violation of all norms and security. “If these bugs were implanted
physically on our machinery, telephones and computers, it means a serious breach in security. Who did that job for
them? It’s very alarming situation. Even if they accessed our data remotely, it is quite a serious matter because we
try to de-bug our systems constantly,” said an Indian diplomat, speaking on condition of anonymity.

The document obtained by The Hindu doesn’t say if the bugs were placed physically or if the machines at the Indian
Mission and embassy were targeted through the internet network, bugs similar to those aimed at Indian offices were
actually “implanted” in a commercially available encrypted fax machine used at missions such as that of the
European Union. In a recent expose, The Guardian had revealed that the NSA infiltrated the internal computer
network of several European embassies and the EU to intercept their communications. That had led to a roar of
protests from European capitals.

 

Alarm bells have been ringing in New Delhi too since July when it was first reported that 38 embassies and
diplomatic missions, including the Indian embassy in Washington, were targeted by the NSA. Reacting to the
reports, the Ministry of External Affairs spokesperson Syed Akbaruddin had expressed concern at the “disconcerting”
reports and said that the government would take up the concern with the Americans. But at that time, the Indian
government was neither aware of the fact that the UN mission in New York too was a “target” of NSA bugging nor did
the officials know a thing about the nature and capabilities of the bugs used for snooping on their offices.

The Indian mission to the UN has so far not reacted to either the reports of snooping on foreign missions nor to The
Hindu’s queries sent to its office in New York, but the embassy officials have discussed the issue with their American
counterparts. “Our government has expressed concerns over the reports of monitoring of the Indian Embassy in
Washington, D.C. by US. agencies, and the Embassy in Washington D.C. has raised these concerns with the US.
government,” said an embassy official in an email repose to The Hindu’s queries, without elaborating at what level
and in which meeting the issue was raised or what was the response of American officials.

But the US. officials have already made it clear that they would not “apologise” to anyone for the bugging of foreign
mission, including the Indian embassy and New York office, as shown in NSA documents. “While we’re not going to
comment publicly on the specifics of alleged intelligence activities, as a matter of policy we’ve made clear that the
US. gathers foreign intelligence of the type gathered by all nations,” US. State Department spokesman Patrick
Ventrell had told reporters at his daily news conference on July 2, a day after the spying on European embassies
was revealed for the first time in reports where India was just mentioned in a passing reference.

Keywords: DIA, NSA snooping, US surveillance programme, National Security Agency, Prism, Freedom of
Information Act

 

