 

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATIONr IS

TOP SECRET // SI / TK 1/ REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

 

 

Web search

Agency-all Emails

SID—all Emails
W

SCOAWK: The SID Mailbag
We

SIDtodax Series ,
SIGINT Worldwide VTC

....Jl

SIDtoday Article
Letter to the Editor

SIGINT—y Social Media Page

Q

(SI/REL) NSA Lends Support to Upcoming G8 and G20‘Summits

FROM: 1 .
Strategic Intelligence Issues (817)
Run Date: 06/23/2010

(SI/REL) President Obama will travel to Canada to participate in the G8 land G20 Summit

in Canada

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

from 25 to 27 June. NSA is actively assisting executive protection and event security, and

providing support to policymakers.

Background (U)

(U) As host, Canada has set this G8 Summit's theme: Recovery and New Beginning. 0n the G8
agenda are international development (health, food security, natural resources trade, and climate

change); and peace and security (nonproliferation and Afghanistan-Pakistan).
(U) The G20 Summit is to focus on implementing the September 2009 Pittsbt

framework for strong and balanced world economic growth. Also on the agent
ﬁnancial institutions' reform and re-financing, ﬁnancial sector regulatory refer

trade protectionism.

i'ﬂtl ‘ " 

Summit Venues (U)

(U) The G8 Summit will be held on 25 and 26 June in Huntsville, in Ontario's 'Muskoka Region.

(The G8 Summit venue is also called Muskoka) The 020 Summit will be hclc
Jupe  Toronto, Ontario -- about 140 miles south of Huntsville. A preparatory
G20 Sherpas (aides and personal representatives of the heads of state and gave
23 and 24 June in Toronto.

Threat Potential (U)

(SIIREL) The Intelligence Community assesses that there is no speciﬁc, credil:
al-Qa'ida or other Islamic extremists are targeting the G8 and 620 Summits. A
associated groups, however, have expressed interest in targeting Canada in the
Summits may provide an attractive target for terrorists seeking to capitalize on
coverage.

(S/IREL) The Community judges, however, that issue-based extremists pose a
to the Summits. These extremists have conducted acts of vandalism at previou
summits. Similar disruptive activity will probably occur throughout the Sum
more concentrated during the G20 in Toronto.

G8 and 620 Summit Participants (U)

ugh G20 Summit’s
la are international
m, and countering

on 26 and 27
meeting among
meat) is set for

1e information that
l-Qa'ida and
past, and the
the media

3 G8 and G20
its, and will be

 

(U) The G8 -~ the Group of Eight «- is both the forum of eight industrialized 11
annual meetingof the heads of state or govemmenstof these eight nations: C
Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia, United Kingdom, and the United States. For th
Summit, Canada has invited the leaders of Algeria, Egypt, Ethiopia, Malawi, 1\
and South Africa to participate in an Africa outreach session. Also invited are
and Jamaica.

tions and the
da, France,
Huntsville G8
ligeria, Senegal,
Colombia, Haiti,

 

 

 

more likely threat .

(U) The G20 -- the Group of Twenty -- consists of the G8 members plus: Argentina, Australia,
Brazil, China, European Union, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, South
Korea, and Turkey. Also invited to attend the Toronto G20 Summit are: Ethiopia, Malawi,
Netherlands, Nigeria, Spain, and Vietnam, plus the Financial Stability Board, “116 International
Monetary Fund, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, the United
Nations and its International Labour Organization, the World Bank Group, and the World Trade
Organization. (The next G20 Summit will be held during November 2010 in Seoul, South

Korea.)

Intelligence Community Support Structure (U)

 

(S/IREL) The Director of National Intelligence Representative (DNIR) in Ott a is the United
States Government (U SG) intelligence lead for the G8 and G20 Summits. The DNI's Special
Events Intelligence Coordinator (SEIC) will operate a Threat Integration Cent r (TIC) in the
US. Embassy in Ottawa to support him during both events. The TIC began n a1 operations on
22 June, and will operate 0600 to 2100 EDT from 24 through 27 June. The TIC will publish a
twice daily Situation Report, respond to Requests for Information and coordinate the
dissemination of intelligence and pre-event assessments.

NSA Support to Event Security (U)

(SI/REL) Relevant SID reporting ofﬁces are aware of the Summits and poiSed to report in a
timely matter intelligence related to the events. While NSA will have no physical presence in the
. TIC, direct coordination will be through the CTMMC and NSOC, who will further collaborate
with the Special U.S. Liaison Ofﬁce, Ottawa (SUSLOO) staff and provide thre at warning
directly to the venues. NSA support planning has been closely coordinated with the Canadian
partner through SUSLOO.

(S//SI//REL) NSA support to both events may include, but is not limited to: executive protection,
US. policy goals, situational awareness, threat information, and local security posture. Reporting
instructions have been published by $12 in "SIGINT Reporting in Support of

 

  
 
  

established for the G8 and G20 Summits on Extended Shared Enterprise Co
(ESECS). See "CASE-2010-99: //FOUO G8 and G20 Summits in Canada 5-27 June." A
WikiInfo page G8-G20 Canada 2010 has been created for the Summits, and ditional
information may be found at the $1 7 Economics and Global Issues G8/G20 w bsite.

(S/lREL) CTMMC will be the focal point for 24/7 CT operations, employing ormal procedures
to ensure timely and effective distribution of threat tippers and lead informatio , to coordinate
CT activities related to any threat situation, and to facilitate foreign release re ests.

(C//REL) Sl 11's SCC desk will be responsible for coordinating RFIs and res nses, while
NSOC/CRSMM will respond to time critical RFIs after hours. NSOC/CRSM will also
coordinate drafts of the TIC's twice-daily sitreps. -

 

 

(Cf/REL) NSOC/APSMM will provide reaehback to TOPIs and extended enterprise for policy
support issues using normal call-in procedures and instructions.

(S/IREL) NSOC/SRO will facilitate after-hour requests for release of non-thrmnfonnation,
while 812‘s Partnership Dissemination Cell (PDC) will perform this function 'ng normal duty

hours.

(Sf/REL) NSA's Event lead, S l 7 Strategic Intelligence Issues, will work exten ed hours,
approximately 0600 to 2200 EDT through 27 June to maintain situational aw eness of SIGINT
capabilities and facilitate coordination across the SIGINT system and with the IC.

(S/lREL) SUSLOO personnel will be available for call-in by CTMMC, NSOC or 817 to provide
local support to the TIC for imminent threat situations.

Customer Requirements (U)

(SI/REL) There are currently seven limited and six standing Information Need; related to the two
summits.

 

 

 

For Further Inform)

   
 

(U/I’FOUO) The 817 Special Events Team can be reached
E V ' MW.

   

con entﬁof 80123

In ormation Owner I ‘

‘

w. I

 
  

    
 

l I
D NAMIC PAGE -

 

   

