TOP SECRET/NOFORN

PRESIDENTIAL POLICY DIRECTIVE/PPD—ZO

 

MEMORANDUM FOR THE VICE PRESIDENT

THE SECRETARY OF STATE

THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY

THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL

THE SECRETARY OF COMMERCE

THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY

THE SECRETARY OF HOMELAND SECURITY

ASSISTANT TO THE PRESIDENT AND CHIEF OF STAFF

DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET

ASSISTANT TO THE PRESIDENT FOR NATIONAL SECURITY
AFFAIRS

DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

ASSISTANT TO THE PRESIDENT FOR HOMELAND SECURITY
AND COUNTERTERRORISM

DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
POLICY

DIRECTOR OF THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

DIRECTOR OF THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF

DIRECTOR OF THE NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY

SUBJECT: U.S. Cyber Operations Policy (U)

This Presidential Policy Directive (PPD) supersedes National
Security Presidential Directive (NSPD)—38 of July 7, 2004. This
directive complements, but does not affect, NSPD—54/Homeland
Security Presidential Directive (HSPD)—23 on “Cybersecurity
Policy” of January 8, 2008; National Security Directive (NSD)~42
on “National Policy for the Security of National Security
Telecommunications and Information Systems” of July 5, 1990; and
PPD—8 on “National Preparedness” of March 30, 2011. (C/NF)

1. Definitions (U)

The following terms are defined for the purposes of this
directive and should be used when possible in interagency

TOP SECRET/NOFORN
Reason: l.4(a)(c)(e)(g)
Declassify on: 10/16/37

TOP SECRET/NOFORN 2

documents and communications on this topic to ensure common

understanding. (U)
Cyberspace: The interdependent network of information
technology infrastructures that includes the Internet,
telecommunications networks, computers, information or
communications systems, networks, and embedded processors and
controllers. (U)
Network Defense: Programs, activities, and the use of tools
necessary to facilitate them (including those governed by
NSPD—S4/HSPD—23 and NSD—42) conducted on a computer, network,
or information or communications system by the owner or with
the consent of the owner and, as appropriate, the users for
the primary purpose of protecting (1) that computer, network,
or system; (2) data stored on, processed on, or transiting
that computer, network, or system; or (3) physical and virtual
infrastructure controlled by that computer, network, or
system. Network defense does not involve or require accessing
or conducting activities on computers, networks, or
information or communications systems without authorization
from the owners or exceeding access authorized by the owners.
(U)
Malicious Cyber Activity: Activities, other than those
authorized by or in accordance with U.S. law, that seek to
compromise or impair the confidentiality, integrity, or
availability of computers, information or communications
systems, networks, physical or virtual infrastructure
controlled by computers or information systems, or information
resident thereon. (U)
Cyber Effect: The manipulation, disruption, denial,
degradation, or destruction of computers, information or
communications systems, networks, physical or virtual
infrastructure controlled by computers or information systems,
or information resident thereon. (U)

Cyber Collection: Operations and related programs or
activities conducted by or on behalf of the United States
Government, in or through cyberspace, for the primary purpose
of collecting intelligence ~ including information that can be
used for future operations - from computers, information or
communications systems, or networks with the intent to remain
undetected. Cyber collection entails accessing a computer,
information system, or network without authorization from the
owner or operator of that computer, information system, or
network or from a party to a communication or by exceeding
authorized access. Cyber collection includes those activities
essential and inherent to enabling cyber collection, such as

 

TOP SECRET/NOFORN

TOP SECRET/NOFORN 3

inhibiting detection or attribution, even if they create cyber
effects. (C/NF)

Defensive Cyber Effects Operations (DCEO): Operations and
related programs or activities — other than network defense or
cyber collection — conducted by or on behalf of the

United States Government, in or through cyberspace, that are
intended to enable or produce cyber effects outside

United States Government networks for the purpose of defending
or protecting against imminent threats or ongoing attacks or
malicious cyber activity against U.S. national interests from
inside or outside cyberspace. (C/NF)

Nonintrusive Defensive Countermeasures (NDCM): The subset of
DCEO that does not require accessing computers, information or
communications systems, or networks without authorization from
the owners or operators of the targeted computers, information
or communications systems, or networks or exceeding authorized
access and only creates the minimum cyber effects needed to
mitigate the threat activity. (C/NF)

Offensive Cyber Effects Operations (OCEO): Operations and
related programs or activities — other than network defense,
cyber collection, or DCEO — conducted by or on behalf of the
United States Government, in or through cyberspace, that are
intended to enable or produce cyber effects outside

United States Government networks. (C/NF)

Cyber Operations: Cyber collection, DCEO (including NDCM),
and OCEO collectively. (U)

Significant Consequences: Loss of life, significant
responsive actions against the United States, significant
damage to property, serious adverse U.S. foreign policy
consequences, or serious economic impact on the United States.
(U)

U.S. National Interests: Matters of vital interest to the
United States to include national security, public safety,
national economic security, the safe and reliable functioning
of “critical infrastructure,” and the availability of “key
resources.”1 (U)

Emergency Cyber Action: A cyber operation undertaken at the
direction of the head of a department or agency with
appropriate authorities who has determined that such action is
necessary, pursuant to the requirements of this directive, to
mitigate an imminent threat or ongoing attack against U.S.
national interests from inside or outside cyberspace and under
circumstances that at the time do not permit obtaining prior

 

 

 

 

1 As these terms are used in HSPD-7 on “Critical Infrastructure,
Identification, Prioritization, and Protection” from December 17, 2003. (U)

TOP SECRET/NOFORN

TOP SECRET/NOFORN 4

Presidential approval to the extent that such approval would
otherwise be required. (S/NF)

II. Purpose and Scope (U)

The United States has an abiding interest in developing and
maintaining use of cyberspace as an integral part of U.S.
national capabilities to collect intelligence and to deter,
deny, or defeat any adversary that seeks to harm U.S. national
interests in peace, crisis, or war. Given the evolution in U.S.
experience, policy, capabilities, and understanding of the cyber
threat, and in information and communications technology, this
directive establishes updated principles and processes as part
of an overarching national cyber policy framework. (C/NF)
The United States Government shall conduct all cyber
operations consistent with the U.S. Constitution and other
applicable laws and policies of the United States, including
Presidential orders and directives. (C/NF)
The United States Government shall conduct DCEO and OCEO under
this directive consistent with its obligations under
international law, including with regard to matters of
sovereignty and neutrality, and, as applicable, the law of
armed conflict. (C/NF)

This directive pertains to cyber operations, including those
that support or enable kinetic, information, or other types of
operations. Most of this directive is directed exclusively to
DCEO and OCEO. (S/NF)
The United States Government has mature capabilities and
effective processes for cyber collection. (S/NF)

Therefore, this directive affirms and does not intend to alter
existing procedures, guidelines, or authorities for cyber
collection. (S/NF)

This directive provides a procedure for cyber collection
operations that are reasonably likely to result in
“significant consequences.”2 (S/NF)

The principles and requirements in this directive apply except
as otherwise lawfully directed by the President. With the
exception of the grant of authority to the Secretary of Defense
to conduct Emergency Cyber Actions as provided below, nothing in
this directive is intended to alter the existing authorities of,
or grant new authorities to, any United States Government
department or agency (including authorities to carry out

 

2 NSPD—38 referred to operations with significant consequences as “sensitive
offensive cyber operations.” (S/NF)

TOP SECRET/NOFORN

TOP SECRET/NOFORN 5

operational activities), or supersede any existing coordination
and approval processes, other than those of NSPD—38. Nothing in
this directive is intended to limit or impair military
commanders from using DCEO or OCEO specified in a military
action approved by the President and previously coordinated and
deconflicted as required by existing processes and this
directive. (S/NF)

In addition, this directive does not pertain to or alter
existing authorities related to the following categories of
activities by or on behalf of the United States Government,
regardless of whether they produce cyber effects:
Activities conducted under section 503 of the National
Security Act of 1947 (as amended);
Activities conducted pursuant to the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Act, the approval authority delegated to the
Attorney General (AG) by section 2;5 of Executive Order 12333
(as amended), or law enforcement authorities; however, cyber
operations reasonably likely to result in significant
consequences still require Presidential approval, and
operations that reasonably can be expected to adversely affect
other United States Government operations still require
coordination under established processes;
Activities conducted by the United States Secret Service for
the purpose of protecting the President, the Vice President,
and others as defined in 18 U.S.C. § 3056; however, cyber
operations reasonably likely to result in significant
consequences still require Presidential approval, and
operations that reasonably can be expected to adversely affect
other United States Government operations still require
coordination under established processes;
The use of online personas and other virtual operations3 —
undertaken exclusively for counterintelligence, intelligence
collection, or law enforcement purposes ~ that do not involve
the use of DCEO or OCEO;
Activities conducted in cyberspace pursuant to
counterintelligence authorities for the purpose of protecting
specific intelligence sources, methods, and activities;

Signals intelligence collection other than cyber collection as
defined in this directive;

Open—source intelligence collection;

Network defense;

 

3 Human intelligence operations undertaken via the Internet. (S/NF)

TOP SECRET/NOFORN

TOP SECRET/NOFORN 6

Traditional electronic warfare4 activities;

The development of content to support influence campaigns,
military deception, or military information support
operations; or

Simple transit of data or commands through networks that do
not create cyber effects on those networks. (S/NF)

III. Guiding Principles for DCEO and OCEO (U)

DCEO and OCEO may raise unique national security and foreign
policy concerns that require additional coordination and policy
considerations because cyberspace is globally connected. DCEO
and OCEO, even for subtle or clandestine operations, may
generate cyber effects in locations other than the intended
target, with potential unintended or collateral consequences
that may affect U.S. national interests in many locations.
(S/NF)

The United States Government shall conduct DCEO and OCEO in a

manner consistent with applicable values, principles, and norms

for state behavior that the United States Government promotes

domestically and internationally as described in the

2011 “International Strategy for Cyberspace.” (C/NF)
National—level strategic objectives and operational
necessities shall dictate what the United States Government
seeks to accomplish with DCEO and OCEO. (C/NF)

The United States Government shall integrate DCEO and OCEO, as
appropriate, with other diplomatic, informational, military,
economic, financial, intelligence, counterintelligence, and
law enforcement options, taking into account effectiveness,
costs, risks, potential consequences, foreign policy, and
other policy considerations. (C/NF)

The United States Government shall reserve the right to act in
accordance with the United States’ inherent right of self
defense as recognized in international law, including through
the conduct of DCEO. (C/NF)

The United States Government shall conduct neither DCEO nor
OCEO that are intended or likely to produce cyber effects
within the United States unless approved by the President. A
department or agency, however, with appropriate authority may

 

4 As defined by the Joint Dictionary 1-02, “Department of Defense Dictionary

of Military and Associated Terms” (as amended through February 15, 2012):
military action involving the use of electromagnetic or directed energy to
control the electromagnetic spectrum or to attack the enemy. Electronic
warfare consists of three divisions: electronic attack, electronic
protection, and electronic warfare support. (U)

TOP SECRET/NOFORN

TOP SECRET/NOFORN 7

conduct a particular case of DCEO that is intended or likely
to produce cyber effects within the United States if it
qualifies as an Emergency Cyber Action as set forth in this
directive and otherwise complies with applicable laws and
policies, including Presidential orders and directives.
(C/NF)

The United States Government shall obtain consent from countries
in which cyber effects are expected to occur or those countries
hosting U.S. computers and systems used to conduct DCEO or OCEO
unless:
Military actions approved by the President and ordered by the
Secretary of Defense authorize nonconsensual DCEO or OCEO,
with provisions made for using existing processes to conduct
appropriate interagency coordination on targets, geographic
areas, levels of effect, and degrees of risk for the
operations;
DCEO is undertaken in accordance with the United States’
inherent right of self defense as recognized in international
law, and the United States Government provides notification
afterwards in a manner consistent with the protection of
U.S. military and intelligence capabilities and foreign policy
considerations and in accordance with applicable law; or
The President - on the recommendation of the Deputies
Committee and, as appropriate, the Principals Committee -
determines that an exception to obtaining consent is
necessary, takes into account overall U.S. national interests
and equities, and meets a high threshold of need and effective
outcomes relative to the risks created by such an exception.
(S/NF)

The information revealed to other countries in the course of
seeking consent shall be consistent with operational security
requirements and the protection of intelligence sources,
methods, and activities. (S/NF)

The United States Government, to ensure appropriate application
of these principles, shall make all reasonable efforts, under
circumstances prevailing at the time, to identify the adversary
and the ownership and geographic location of the targets and
related infrastructure where DCEO or OCEO will be conducted or
cyber effects are expected to occur, and to identify the people
and entities, including U.S. persons, that could be affected by
proposed DCEO or OCEO. (S/NF)

TOP SECRET/NOFORN

TOP SECRET/NOFORN 8

Additional Considerations for DCEO (U)

The Nation requires flexible and agile capabilities that

leverage the full resources of the United States Government to

conduct necessary and proportionate DCEO. These operations

shall conform to the following additional policy principles:
The United States Government shall reserve use of DCEO to
protect U.S. national interests in circumstances when network
defense or law enforcement measures are insufficient or cannot
be put in place in time to mitigate a threat, and when other
previously approved measures would not be more appropriate, or
if a Deputies or Principals Committee review determines that
proposed DCEO provides an advantageous degree of
effectiveness, timeliness, or efficiency compared to other
methods commensurate with the risks;

The United States Government shall conduct DCEO with the least
intrusive methods feasible to mitigate a threat;

The United States Government shall seek partnerships with
industry, other levels of government as appropriate, and other
nations and organizations to promote cooperative defensive
capabilities, including, as appropriate, through the use of
DCEO as governed by the provisions in this directive; and

 

Partnerships with industry and other levels of government for
the protection of critical infrastructure shall be coordinated
with the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), working with
relevant sector-specific agencies and, as appropriate, the
Department of Commerce (DOC). (S/NF)

The United States recognizes that network defense, design, and
management cannot mitigate all possible malicious cyber activity
and reserves the right, consistent with applicable law, to
protect itself from malicious cyber activity that threatens U.S.
national interests. (S/NF)
The United States Government shall work with private industry
— through DHS, DOC, and relevant sector’specific agencies ~ to
protect critical infrastructure in a manner that minimizes the
need for DCEO against malicious cyber activity; however, the
United States Government shall retain DCEO, including
anticipatory action taken against imminent threats, as
governed by the provisions in this directive, as an option to
protect such infrastructure. (S/NF)

The United States Government shall — in coordination, as
appropriate, with DHS, law enforcement, and other relevant
departments and agencies, to include sector-specific agencies
— obtain the consent of network or computer owners for
United States Government use of DCEO to protect against
malicious cyber activity on their behalf, unless the activity

TOP SECRET/NOFORN

TOP SECRET/NOFORN 9

implicates the United States’ inherent right of self—defense
as recognized in international law or the policy review
processes established in this directive and appropriate legal
reviews determine that such consent is not required. (S/NF)

Offensive Cyber Effects Operations (U)
OCEO can offer unique and unconventional capabilities to advance
U.S. national objectives around the world with little or no
warning to the adversary or target and with potential effects
ranging from subtle to severely damaging. The development and
sustainment of OCEO capabilities, however, may require
considerable time and effort if access and tools for a specific
target do not already exist. (TS/NF)
The United States Government shall identify potential targets
of national importance where OCEO can offer a favorable
balance of effectiveness and risk as compared with other
instruments of national power, establish and maintain OCEO
capabilities integrated as appropriate with other 0.5.
offensive capabilities, and execute those capabilities in a
manner consistent with the provisions of this directive.
(TS/NF)

IV. Cyber Operations with Significant Consequences (U)

Specific Presidential approval is required for any cyber
operations — including cyber collection, DCEO, and OCEO —
determined by the head of a department or agency to conduct the
operation to be reasonably likely to result in “significant
consequences” as defined in this directive. This requirement
applies to cyber operations generally, except for those already
approved by the President, even if this directive otherwise does
not pertain to such operations as provided in the “Purpose and
Scope” section of this directive. (S/NF)

V. Threat Response Operations (U)

Responses to Persistent Malicious Cyber Activity (U)
Departments and agencies with appropriate authorities -
consistent with the provisions set forth in this directive and
in coordination with the Departments of State, Defense (DOD),
Justice (DOJ), and Homeland Security; the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI); the Office of the Director of National
Intelligence (DNI); the National Security Agency (NSA); the
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA); the Departments of the
Treasury and Energy (DOE); and other relevant members of the
Intelligence Community (IC) and sector~specific agencies ~ shall
establish criteria and procedures to be approved by the

TOP SECRET/NOFORN

TOP SECRET/NOFORN 10

President for responding to persistent malicious cyber activity

against U.S. national interests. Such criteria and procedures

shall include the following requirements:
The United States Government shall reserve use of such
responses to circumstances when network defense or law
enforcement measures are insufficient or cannot be put in
place in time to mitigate the malicious cyber activity; and
Departments and agencies shall conduct these responses in a
manner not reasonably likely to result in significant
consequences and use the minimum action required to mitigate
the activity. (S/NF)

Emergency Cyber Actions (C/NF)
The Secretary of Defense is hereby authorized to conduct, or a
department or agency head with appropriate authorities may
conduct, under procedures approved by the President, Emergency
Cyber Actions necessary to mitigate an imminent threat or
ongoing attack using DCEO if circumstances at the time do not
permit obtaining prior Presidential approval (to the extent that
such approval would otherwise be required) and the department or
agency head determines that:
An emergency action is necessary in accordance with the
United States inherent right of self—defense as recognized in
international law to prevent imminent loss of life or
significant damage with enduring national impact on the
Primary Mission Essential Functions of the United States
Government,5 U.S. critical infrastructure and key resources,
or the mission of U.S. military forces;
Network defense or law enforcement would be insufficient or
unavailable in the necessary timeframe, and other previously
approved activities would not be more appropriate;

 

The Emergency Cyber Actions are reasonably likely not to
result in significant consequences;

The Emergency Cyber Actions will be conducted in a manner
intended to be nonlethal in purpose, action, and consequence;

The Emergency Cyber Actions will be limited in magnitude,
scope, and duration to that level of activity necessary to
mitigate the threat or attack;

The Emergency Cyber Actions, when practicable, have been
coordinated with appropriate departments and agencies,
including State, DOD, DHS, DOJ, the Office of the DNI, FBI,
CIA, NSA, the Treasury, DOE, and other relevant members of the
IC and sector-specific agencies; and

 

5 As defined in NSPD~5l/HSPD—20 on “National Continuity Policy" of May 9,
2007. (U)

TOP SECRET/NOFORN

TOP SECRET/NOFORN 11

The Emergency Cyber Actions are consistent with the

U.S. Constitution and other applicable laws and policies of
the United States, including Presidential orders and
directives. (S/NF)

In addition, Emergency Cyber Actions that are intended or likely
to produce cyber effects within the United States (or otherwise
likely to adversely affect U.S. network defense activities or
U.S. networks) must be conducted:
Under the procedures and, as appropriate, criteria for
domestic operations previously approved by the President; and
Under circumstances that at the time of the Emergency Cyber
Action preclude the use of network defense, law enforcement,
or some form of DOD support to civil authorities that would
prevent the threatened imminent loss of life or significant
damage. (S/NF)

Department and agency heads shall report Emergency Cyber Actions
to the President through the National Security Advisor as soon
as feasible. If the coordination specified above is not
practicable in the available time, then notification shall occur
after the fact as soon as possible to inform subsequent whole—
ofegovernment response and recovery activities. (S/NF)

Until such time as any additional criteria for domestic
operations are approved by the President, authorization by
department and agency heads for Emergency Cyber Actions that are
intended or likely to produce cyber effects within the United
States (or otherwise likely to adversely affect U.S. network
defense activities or U.S. networks) shall be granted only if
the President has provided prior approval for such activity, or
circumstances at the time do not permit obtaining prior approval
from the President and such actions are conducted within the
other constraints defined above. (S/NF)

VI. Process (U)

The National Security Staff (NSS) shall formalize the functions
of the Cyber Operations Policy Working Group (COP~WG) as the
primary United States Government forum below the level of an
Interagency Policy Committee (IPC) for integrating DCEO or OCEO
policy, including consideration of exceptions or refinements to
the principles of this directive. The COP—WG shall work with
other elements of the policy community as appropriate to the
geographic or functional context of the DCEO— or OCEO-related
policy discussion at the earliest opportunity. The COP—WG is

TOP SECRET/NOFORN

TOP SECRET/NOFORN 12

not an operational group, but will address policy issues related
to the conduct of operations raised by departments and agencies
or the NSS. (S/NF)

Departments and agencies shall work through the COP~WG to raise
unresolved or ambiguous policy questions in an integrated IPC
meeting of all appropriate national and economic security
stakeholders. The N88 shall use existing channels to elevate
any unresolved policy conflicts to the Deputies and Principals
Committees, as appropriate. (C/NF)

Departments and agencies shall continue to use existing
operational processes for cyber operations, except as those
processes are modified by or under this directive. Other types
of operations that are supported or enabled by cyber operations
shall use their existing operational processes. This continued
use of existing operational processes applies, for example, to
operations conducted under military orders that authorize DCEO
or OCEO, including clandestine preparatory activities. (C/NF)

Departments and agencies, during planning for proposed cyber
operations, shall use established processes6 to coordinate and
deconflict with other organizations ~ including, as appropriate,
State, DOD, DOJ, DHS, members of the IC, and relevant sector~
specific agencies — and obtain any other approvals required
under applicable policies, except as those processes are
modified by or under this directive. Departments and agencies
shall modify or enhance these processes as future circumstances
dictate. (S/NF)

Departments and agencies shall coordinate DCEO and OCEO with
State and Chiefs of Station or their designees in countries
where DCEO or OCEO are conducted or cyber effects are expected
to occur. (S/NF)

Coordination of DCEO and OCEO with network defense efforts shall
be sufficient to enable a whole—of—government approach to the
protection of U.S. national interests and shall identify
potential implications of proposed DCEO and OCEO for U.S.
networks, including potential adversary responses or unintended
consequences of U.S. operations for which the United States
Government or the private sector would need to prepare. This
coordination shall occur in a manner consistent with operational

 

6 Including the May 9, 2007, “Trilateral Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) among

the Department of Defense and the Department of Justice and the Intelligence

Community Regarding Computer Network Attack and Computer Network Exploitation
Activities,” and other operational coordination processes that exist between

departments and agencies. (S/NF)

TOP SECRET/NOFORN

TOP SECRET/NOFORN 13

security requirements and the protection of intelligence
sources, methods, and activities. (S/NF)
Toward this end of ensuring a unified whole-of—government
approach, departments and agencies shall coordinate and
deconflict DCEO and OCEO with network defense efforts of other
departments and agencies as appropriate. (S/NF)
In addition, DCEO and OCEO with potential implications for
U.S. networks shall be deconflicted as appropriate and
coordinated with DHS, appropriate law enforcement agencies,
and relevant sector—specific agencies. (S/NF)
The United States Government shall make all reasonable efforts
to identify and notify, as appropriate, private sector
entities that could be affected by DCEO and OCEO. (S/NF)

Policy Criteria (U)
Policy deliberations for DCEO and OCEO shall consider, but not

be limited to, the following criteria:
Impact: The potential threat from adversary actions or the
potential benefits, scope, and recommended prioritization of
proposed U.S. operations as compared with other approaches —
including, as appropriate, network defense by the
United States Government or private sector network operators;
Risks: Assessments of intelligence gain or loss, the risk of
retaliation or other impacts on U.S. networks or interests
(including economic), impact on the security and stability of
the Internet, and political gain or loss to include impact on
foreign policies, bilateral and multilateral relationships
(including Internet governance), and the establishment of
unwelcome norms of international behavior;
Methods: The intrusiveness, timeliness, efficiency, capacity,
and effectiveness of operational methods to be employed;
Geography and Identity: Geographic and identity aspects of
the proposed activity, including the location of operations
and the resulting effects, the identity of network owners and
users that will be affected, and the identity or type — when
known — of adversaries to be countered or affected by U.S.
operations;
Transparency: The need for consent or notification of network
or computer owners or host countries, the potential for impact
on U.S. persons and U.S. private sector networks, and the need
for any public or private communications strategies before or
after an operation; and
Authorities and Civil Liberties: The available authorities
and procedures and the potential for cyber effects inside the
United States or against U.S. persons. (S/NF)

 

 

TOP SECRET/NOFORN

TOP SECRET/NOFORN 14

Policy decisions shall be broad enough and include rationales in
order to provide guidelines and direction for future proposals
with the same operational and risk parameters. (C/NF)

Annex: Implementation (U)

 

Departments and agencies shall establish necessary capabilities
and procedures for appropriate and timely implementation of DCEO
and OCEO policies in the national interest. (C/NF)

Policy Process (U)
Departments and agencies shall, as appropriate, conduct DCEO
and OCEO in accordance with the principles set forth in this
directive and shall bring forward to the COP—WG situations
that require policy discussion, including considerations of
exceptions to those principles, using the policy criteria
described in this directive. [Action: All; ongoing] (C/NF)
The National Security Advisor, through the NSS, shall
establish and operate the COP~WG to serve as the entry point
for interagency deliberations of policy matters related to
DCEO and OCEO. [Action: NSS; ongoing] (C/NF)
The National Security Advisor, through the NSS, as needed,
shall use the existing policy escalation process through an
appropriate joint lPC—level group involving all stakeholders
for a given situation, the Deputies Committee, and the
Principals Committee. This process shall clarify the
application of the principles set forth in this directive to
specific operations, including consideration of exceptions or
refinements to those principles. [Actionz NSS; ongoing]
(C/NF)
The NSS, as needed, shall lead reviews by appropriate
departments and agencies of legal issues associated with DCEO
and OCEO. The N88 shall refer legal questions to the chief
legal officers of the appropriate departments or agencies or
to DOJ for resolution of interagency disagreements or as
otherwise appropriate. [Actionz NSS; ongoing] (C/NF)
The DNI shall continue to ensure, through appropriate policies
and procedures, the deconfliction, coordination, and
integration of all IC cyber operations and serve as the IC
focal point for strategic planning and policy coordination
related to cyber operations, both within the IC and with other
departments and agencies in interagency coordination
processes. [Actionz DNI; ongoing] (C/NF)

TOP SECRET/NOFORN

TOP SECRET/NOFORN 15

Policy Reviews and Preparation (U)
The Office of the DNI, in coordination with appropriate
departments and agencies, shall prepare a classification guide
for departments and agencies to use in the implementation of
the policies in this directive. [Actionz Office of the DNI;
2 months after directive approval] (U)
The National Security Advisor, through the NSS, shall lead an
interagency review of the United States Government’s
communications strategy, including public affairs guidance,
regarding DCEO and OCEO. Pending approval of this strategy by
the Deputies Committee, the United States Government's public
posture on related matters shall be: “All United States
Government activities in cyberspace are consistent with the
principles stated in the May 2011 International Strategy for
Cyberspace.” [Actiont NSS report to Deputies; 1 month after
directive approval] (C/NF)
The National Security Advisor, through the NSS, shall work
with the Secretaries of Defense, State, and Homeland Security,
the AG, the DNI, relevant IC and sector—specific agencies, and
other heads of departments and agencies as appropriate to
develop for the conduct of Emergency Cyber Actions, as set
forth in this directive — in addition to the previously cited
procedures and, as appropriate, domestic criteria to be
approved by the President — detailed concepts of operation,
supporting processes, communications capabilities, exercises,
and training. In addition, the NSS — working with these same
departments and agencies ~ shall, as necessary, develop for
Presidential approval procedures and criteria for DCEO to be
conducted in response to malicious cyber activity. [Actionz
NSS update on implementation to Deputies; 3 months after
directive approval] (C/NF)
The Secretary of Defense, the DNI, and the Director of the CIA
— in coordination with the AG, the Secretaries of State and
Homeland Security, and relevant IC and sector—specific
agencies ~ shall prepare for approval by the President through
the National Security Advisor a plan that identifies potential
systems, processes, and infrastructure against which the
United States should establish and maintain OCEO capabilities;
proposes circumstances under which OCEO might be used; and
proposes necessary resources and steps that would be needed
for implementation, review, and updates as U.S. national
security needs change. [Actionz DOD, Office of the DNI, and
CIA update to Deputies on scope of plans; 6 months after
directive approval] (TS/NF)

 

TOP SECRET/NOFORN

TOP SECRET/NOFORN 16

The Secretary of Defense and other department and agency heads
as appropriate — in coordination with the Secretary of
Homeland Security, the AG, and the DNI — shall develop and
maintain a flexible, agile capability for the purpose of using
DCEO to defend U.S. networks consistent with the provisions
set forth in this directive. [Action: DOD and others;
ongoing] (C/NF)

The Secretary of Defense ~ in coordination with the
Secretaries of Homeland Security, Commerce, and State, the AG,
the DNI, and relevant IC and sector~specific agencies ~ shall
develop a multi—phase plan to be approved by the Deputies
Committee for testing, reviewing, and implementing NDCM. The
plan shall be subjected to legal review and address
authorities, technical feasibility, operational risks, and
coordination procedures. [Action: DOD present first phase of
plans to Deputies; 2 months after directive approval] (S/NF)

The AG and the DNI ~ in collaboration with the Secretaries of
Defense, State, Commerce, and Homeland Security, and relevant
IC and sector—specific agencies ~ shall develop a multi~phase
plan to be approved by the Deputies Committee for a test of
the applicability and efficacy of counterintelligence
authorities in the conduct of DCEO. The plan shall be
subjected to legal review and address technical feasibility,
operational risks, and coordination procedures. [Actionz DOJ
and Office of the DNI present first phase of plans to
Deputies; 2 months after directive approval] (S/NF)

The Secretaries of Defense and Homeland Security, the DN1, the
AG, and the Director of the CIA — in collaboration as
appropriate with the Secretaries of State and Commerce and the
heads of relevant IC and sector—specific agencies ~ shall
develop proposals to be apprOVed by the President through the
National Security Advisor to ensure that a necessary framework
of proposed options, roles, and levels of delegation is in
place for the use of all appropriate United States Government
DCEO and OCEO capabilities to advance and defend U.S. national
interests, including actions taken in response to indications
of imminent threat or when the United States or the Internet
is subjected to a debilitating attack. This framework shall
consider how cyber operations capabilities will complement
other United States Government cyber capabilities, including
network defense and law enforcement. [Actionz DOD, DHS, DOJ,
Office of the DNI, and CIA update to Deputies; 6 months after
directive approval] (S/NF)

Department and agency heads conducting DCEO or OCEO covered
under this directive shall report annually on the use and
effectiveness of operations of the previous year to the

TOP SECRET/NOFORN

TOP SECRET/NOFORN 17

President through the National Security Advisor. [Action:
relevant departments and agencies; ongoing until otherwise
directed] (S/NF)

Foundation Building (U)
The DNI, working with appropriate departments and agencies,
shall continue to lead interagency efforts to improve
intelligence collection in support of DCEO and OCEO, including
under conditions when Internet infrastructure is significantly
degraded. These efforts shall include an enhanced process for
sharing intelligence—based cyber threat information with the
private sector and international partners in the interest of
minimizing the need for DCEO. The DNI shall identify needed
investments — including in research and development, testing,
and evaluation ~ to help develop intelligence capabilities in
support of DCEO and OCEO. [Action: Office of the DNI;
ongoing] (S/NF)
The Secretary of State — in coordination with the Secretaries
of Defense and Homeland Security, the AG, the DNI, and others
as appropriate — shall continue to lead efforts to establish
an international consensus around norms of behavior in
cyberspace to reduce the likelihood of and deter actions by
other nations that would require the United States Government
to resort to DCEO. [Action: State; ongoing] (C/NF)
The AG — through the FBI and in coordination as appropriate
with DHS, appropriate elements of the IC, and other
departments and agencies ~ shall continue to identify,
investigate, mitigate, and disrupt malicious cyber activity in
the interest of minimizing the need for DCEO. The AG, through
the National Cyber Investigative Joint Task Force, shall lead
related interagency efforts by integrating, sharing,
coordinating, and collaborating on counterintelligence,
counterterrorism, intelligence, and law enforcement
information from member organizations concerning
investigations of malicious cyber activity in order to
facilitate the use of all available authorities to address
such threats. These activities shall be coordinated with
other entities and the private sector as appropriate.
[Action: DOJ; ongoing] (C/NF)
The Secretaries of State, Defense, Homeland Security, and
Commerce — along with the AG, the DNI, and others as
appropriate — shall continue to advance interagency efforts
with international partners to increase their cyber capacities
for self protection and, where appropriate, to facilitate
cooperative defense of cyberspace in the interest of
minimizing the need for DCEO. The partnerships shall include

 

TOP SECRET/NOFORN

TOP SECRET/NOFORN 18

application of not only improvements to network defenses, but
also sharing — as appropriate and consistent with operational
security requirements and the protection of intelligence
sources, methods, and activities ~ of DCEO—related
information, tools, and methods consistent with the provisions
set forth in this directive, the National Disclosure Policy,
and with U.S. national interests. [Actionz State, DOD, DHS,
DOC, and Office of the DNI; ongoing] (C/NF)

The Secretary of Homeland Security — in coordination with the
Secretaries of Defense and Commerce, the AG, the DNI, and the
heads of relevant sector—specific agencies — shall continue to
lead interagency efforts to develop partnerships with other
levels of government and the private sector to increase the
nation’s cyber capacities for self protection and, where
appropriate, to facilitate cooperative efforts to secure
cyberspace in the interest of minimizing the need for DCEO.
[Actionz DHS; ongoing] (C/NF)

TOP SECRET/NOFORN

