(S//SI) Topic: Exploiting Terrorist Use of Games & Virtual Environments

(TS// SI) Issue: We know that terrorists use many feature-rich Internet communications media
for operational purposes such as email, VoIP, chat, proxies, and web forums and it is highly
likely they will be making wide use of the many communications features offered by Games and
Virtual Environments (GVE) by 2010. The SIGINT Enterprise needs to begin taking action now
to plan for collection, processing, presentation, and analysis of these communications. With a
few exceptions, NSA can’t even recognize the traffic, and therefore it is impossible to even say
what percentage of the environment is GVE, let alone determine how targets are using the
communications features of GVEs. However, GVEs offer a SIGINT/HUMINT opportunity space
and more research is needed to ﬁgure out effective exploitation.

(S// SI) GVEs today allow individuals to gather with like-minded others online. Many GVEs
offer communications such as private chat (P2P), group chat, chat to an alias, and broadcast chat
—both text and voice. Also many GVEs allow convergent technologies to intermingle such as
XboxLive! which can be run via an Xbox360 gaming console and/or connect via a PC to normal
MSN chat. Second Life offers the ability to anonymously text to a GSM phone (SMS) and soon
they will offer anonymous voice calls so that phone numbers do not have to be known by either
party and won’t show up in collection. Some GVEs allow third party interfaces which allow
limited functionality from a web browser. This overcomes obstacles such as a high-bandwidth
requirement and or not being allowed to download software (think Internet cafe usage). In
addition, many GVEs are able to be used via mobile devices connected wirelessly (phones,
handhelds, laptops). Connected to the GVEs, specialized forums and other social networking
sites have sprung up to provide an additional place to interact, connect, or share. These sites and
any others can be advertised in the GVEs, so that if a terrorist web forum has to move locations it
can be found by its members again. Areas/ groups can be access-restricted, member-only. They
are essentially private meeting places, and can be used for planning, comms, and training, etc.
GVEs are used for collaboration, Forterra’s 3D world is coming to JWICS to do this IC-wide.

(U//FOUO) GVEs have been made that reinforce prejudices and cultural stereotypes while
imparting a targeted message or lesson both from the Western point of view and in the Middle
East. America’s Army is a US. Army produced game that is free download from its recruitment
page and is acknowledged to be so good at this the army no longer needs to use it for
recruitment, they use it for training. The Lebanese Hizballah has taken this concept and the same
basic game design and made its own version of the game called Special Forces 2 (SF2), which its
press section acknowledges is used for recruitment and training in order to prepare their youth to
“fight the enemy”, a radicalizing medium, the ultimate goal is to become a suicide martyr. One
cannot discount the “fun factor” involved—it is important to hold your target audience’s
attention-- and makes ingesting the message not even noticeable. SF2 features multi-player, on-
line text and voice chat for up to 60 players simultaneously, effectively acting like a VPN or
private chat forum. SF2 is offered at $10 a copy and so also goes to fund terrorist operations.

(S// SI) These games offer realistic weapons training (what weapon to use against what target,
what ranges can be achieved, even aiming and ﬁring), military operations and tactics,
photorealistic land navigation and terrain familiarization, and leadership skills. While complete
military training is best achieved in person, perfection is not always required to accomplish the
mission. Some of the 9-11 pilots had never ﬂown a real plane, they had only trained using

 

TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL//20320108

TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL//20320108

