SECREI'HICDMINI'HIUjL TO U 5.3.. ALE- CAN. [iBRI.-'Il]191 [23

United States SIGINT System D
January 2007 Strategic Mission List

Introduction — Director’s Intent

(S.-".="Sl} The SIGL‘YI‘ Strategic Mission List represents the intent of the Director, National Security Agency
in regard to mission priorities and risks for the United States SIGINT System (USE-SS] over the nest l “:1 ii
months. The list is derived from review of the Intelligence Community National lntell igence Priorities
Framework DCli'DNl Guidance, the Strategic 'th"arning Listi National SIGIHT Requirements Process
tNSRPl and other strategic planning documents The missions included on the list are in relative priority
order and represent the most urgent taslts for the USES. The list is not intended to be all encompassing, but
is intended to set Forth guidance on the highest priorities.

Topical Missions and Enduring Targets

tS.-"."‘Sl'} The SIGIT‘CT Strategic Mission List is div idcd into two parts It includes lo critical topical missions
in Part I ot‘the list, which represent missions discerned to he areas of highest priority For the [JESS+ where
SIGHT can make key contributions. In addition to the Io‘ critical topical missions, Part ll of the SIGINT
Strategic Mission List includes t'i enduring targets that are included due to the need to worit these targets
hol istically because of their strategic importance. In addition to their long—term strategic importance, the
enduring targets can potentially “trump” the highest priorin topical missions on the list at any time, based
upon evolving world events. Elements ol‘ these targets are also represented throughout the topical target
sets. For each of the [Li topical missions and each of the 6 enduring targets the Strategic h-lission List
includes:

1) Focus Areas — critically important targets against which the SIGINT enterprise is placing etn phasis.
DIRXSA designation of a target as a focus area constitutes his guidance to the SIGINT System that it is a
"must do“ target for that mission

2) Accepted Risks strategically signiﬁcant targets against which the [LESS is not placing emphasis and
for which SIGINT should not be relied upon  a primer].r source. DiRNS-A’s reasons for accepting these
risks include high difficultv and lack of resources or as an “Economy of Force Measure," in order to
achieve focus on the most critical targets.

A Strategic luvcstmeutTool for SIGINT Resources

(Sn-"SD Given a ﬁnite level of resources available in all mission areas. the Strategic Mission List provides
high—level strategic direction to the global SIGIN'I' system to I" oe us resources on the most impotions-highest
priority areas. "Risks" identify targets that cannot he resourced to tlte level 0113 Focus Are-LL there-133'
acknowl edging that shortfalls will exist. As world circumstances change, these or other targets can be
added to the list as needed; targets no longer ol’criticul Importtmcc can also be removed from die Focus
Area categorv. In additionF other targets, not listed as focus or risk areasF can also he worked 17:}? the ll 533
to a lesser degree to meet other customer requirements. The Strategic Mission List will be reviewed hi-
aunually by the USES Signals intelligence leadership Team. Missions. Focus areas, and .r‘lccepted Rislts
will be adjusted as a means ofprovicling high—level steerage to the \"ation‘s agile SIGHT Sysrem.

Derit'cd Front VSAI'CTSSM l—ﬁE
ﬂuted; llltl-ll L-‘Li
D's-classify Chi: EIJEEJI lﬂ'}
Sis—('TREI'E'JI'I'JMIts—11‘}le TU Hide ALE. CAN. fiEll-U-‘Elll‘jll 133

 

SECRET-"FUNlNT'I'REL T0 LEA. Al'S, FAN: GER-"ICON 123

(SHED Changes in Strategie Mission List - New: Neither the number efmissiuns nor fueus areas are
ﬁxed

I. Additiens re The list 01' changes in IBM are highligined in bold 1exT For easy Identifiemien 'I'iiese
changes are carried :15- hulel far nne eyele ufthe list and Illeii changed 1e.- nnrmai lexl
2. Deletiens from the Elm are highlighted in bold double parentheses H j)! for ens-3.- idenlllieiuion
These changes are cum ed for one cycle of the hat and then removed.
3. The SIGIXT Leadership Team v. ill revise the Missinn Liz-1L ad line, when required.

SECRET- 'L'UMINT;”REL TU L'SA- ALE. Cg‘L‘L GER-3313C"?! 123

 

SECRET-"COMINTC'REL T0 I.lS.—\. Al'S, FAN, GBR-‘ECCS'I 123

United States SIGINT System Strategic Mission List —
January 2007

(U) 1. Strategic Mission List - Topical Missions

tS_-".'Sl } A. MISSION: 'I'errorism: Winning the Global War on ’l'errorism.
Focus A reas:

a. All interagenct- Intelligence Ctiiiiniittee on Terrorism { 11C Ti Tier LI and 1 terrorist groups With
capabilities and intentions to attack the US. its interests or allies. or groups actively planning or
carrying. out a terrorist attack against L S persons. Facilities. or inlet‘ests

b. Rey individuals and 'I'ett'oi'ist Support Entities l'l'SL’t lT‘|'-'IJl‘- ed III the Facilitation- financing. and
recruitment or i'atiicalieatiou oi‘all llC'l' 'l'ier U and l tetTOrist group networks globaily.

Accepted Risks: All lltL‘T Tier 2. 3. and 4 ICITUI‘li-i-l groups. and TSEs.

(Si-"SH B. MISSION: Homeland Securit ': Protecting the 11.5. Homeland from terrorist attack and

other transnational threats to safeguard [1.3. persons.I freedoms, critical information. infrastructure.
properly and economy.

Focus A reas:
3 Border Securin Hand. ail'. seat.
_ Direct defense against ten‘orlst attack.
~ Diseases. L‘PILIL‘mIL'S. and pandemies.
_ Executive Protection-'I_I'.S.~Based NSSEs

. Illicit Facilitation as it relates to special interest aliens and FERN materials and teehnologr
Accepted Risks:

a .-"tceeptetl risks as stated in the "'l‘errorisin“ nitsSIon
b. Global coverage ot'all illicit activities ot‘ potential concth lo the Homeland.

(SIESIHREL USA, AllS, CAN, GBR1C. MISSION: 'WMD and CBRN Programs and Proliferation:
ICombating theThreat of Development and Proliferation nf‘t't'eapons of Mass Destruction, (THRS,
and Deliver},- Methods {particularly ballistic and nuclear-capable cruise missiles].
li‘ocus Areas:
a. Development, Acquisition, or llse of ('IIRN.
b. State ‘WI'I'ID and ballistic and cruise missile programs of:
China (biological. chemical, nuclear. ballistic and cruise missiles]
India (nuclear, ballistic missiles}
Iran (biological, chemical, nuclear, and ballistic missilesi
North Korea (biological, chemical, nuclear, ballistic missiles]
Pakistan (nuclear, ballistic missiles)
Russia (biological, chemical, nuclear, ballistic and cruise missiles)
Syria (chemical. nuclear, ballistic missiles).
c. \‘lr'h'lD and missile proliferation activities by states:
China (nuclear, ballistic missiles}. Israel {cruise missiles)
North Korea (nuclear, ballistic missiles}

SECRET' 'L'UMINT;“'REL TD USA. _-\L'S. DEN. GER-3302‘“ 123

 

SECRET-"COMINTC'REL T0 USA. AIR, FAN. GBR-‘ECC‘JI 123

Pakistan (nuclear. ballistic missiles)
Russia [ballistic missile}.

d.“’.\-ID and missile acquisition activities by states:
("hina (cruise Ill issilesl
India [cruise missiles)
lran (nuclear. ballistic missiles}
Pakistan [cruise missiles]
Saudi Arabia [tunic-lean ballistic missiles).

e. Safety.r and Security of “rill D:
Pakistan [nuclear]
Russia {nuclear}.

AcCcptetl Risks:

State WM D and ballistic and cruise missile programs of:
Egypt (ballistic missiles}
Libya [ballistic missiles]
Taiwan {ballistic missiles].

(SIT-"SH D. MISSION: US. Forces at Risk (b'lilitary Support}: Protecting ILS. Militaijr Forces
Deployed Overseas and Enabling their Operations.
Focus Areas:

at. LI 5. forces deploy-ed in. Iraq. Afghanistan. Mideast Region. Korea. and Philippines.

[1. Support to military plannng and operations. Support to UPLAN Sill? l'léoresl.

c. Intentions oi‘t‘orctgn and Indigenous anti—coaimon forces. command and control. DOB, and

operational support In Iraq and Afghanistan

d. Support to US forces in identification ot'l-[VTs in Afghanistan" Pakistan and lraq
Accepted Risks:

:1 Protection of US forces deployed in' Ball-tans [Rowen].

b South Korea leadership intentions in UPLAN it'll?

e. Routine li‘lllilﬂl’y’ support to LB. forces deployed tn non-combat situations.

(Si-'3“ E. N'IISSION: Statei'l’nlitical Stability: Providing Warning of Impending State Instability.
Focus Areas:

3. Internal political {-‘IClWlllBS that could threaten the snn‘i‘rability' ol'leaderslup in countries where US
lle interest in regime CDtlllTillil}' Iraq. At'glianislan. Pakistan. and Saudi Arabia.

[1. Internal political activities that could result in Cl'iSlS In \Dtlll Korea. Sudan-"Dalia liumanilat'ian crisis.
Cuba. Rosin-'0. Turkey. Nigeria. l..L'l.'|E1l'l{JT1. Venezuela. Syria. Bolivia. Latin American Boln'anan
Dex-‘clopinents. and Palestinian .r‘tuthot'tts'.

Accepted Risks: internal political stability of: Egypt. Zimbabwe. (Tote d'lt‘on'e. Liberia. DROF.
Bangladesh. Georgia. Jordan. and Haiti.

(S.-".-'Si} l". b‘llSSIUN: 1'i‘ir'arnine oi‘Stratceic Nuclear .‘rlissile Threats: Providing Warning ol‘a
Strategic Nuclear Missile Attack on the. territory nl'the 5|} United States,

Focus Areas: Areas covered under a peacetime SIGINT stl'atem' maintaining lull capabilities with
reasonablyr sufficient coverage for the provision of warning include: Russia's Nuclear ('3. Mobile

SECRET' 'L'UMINTHV'REL TD USA. _-\L'S. CAN. GER-3302‘“ 123

 

SECRET-"FOMINTC'REL TU USA. ALE, FAX. GER-"202m 123

ICBMs. strategic navy missiles. and Bombers: China's Nuclear C3, Mobile lCBMs. and SSBNs; and
North Korea's Nuclear (73 and potential [CHM ("I'lei Threat.

Accepted Risks: Strategic Targets where SIGINT is not a primary intelligence source in providing
warning: Russia's Silo-based [("Ble: China's Silo-based ICBMs.

(Stiff-ﬁll } G. M ISSIUN: Regional Conflict and Crisisl'Flashpoints to “For: Monitoring Regional
'l‘ensinus that (Zetild Escalate to (Taiii'lictftfrisis.

Focus Areas: Regional ilashpoints that could pose a signiﬁcant threat to U S. strategic interests;
Arab-iran-israel conﬂict. Korean Peninsula. China-Taiwan. India-Pakistan. 1+"enezuela (impact on
surrounding region i. and RtisSIaJTieo-rgia

Accepted Risks: Regional ilasltpoiiits iii: Ethiopia—Eritrea and Africa Great lakes Region

 

tS.-".-'RLiL USA. ALIS. CAN. Gilli- NZL] ll. MISSION: lnlitirnialion Opt-rations: .‘rlastering
Cyberspace and Fret-en ting an Attack on [1.5. Critical Inform ation Systems,
Focus A reas:

a tit-"Si i Enabling ITontputer Nettt'orl-c Defense ill—ND)? Provide cyher threat warningH detection.
characterization. and mitigation services for LS. and allied compoter network operators: Named
Intnusion Sets t'laclnding, but not liiitttetl ic- Gadger Hiss. Seed Sphereu‘ﬂt-marine Trace. Pit-alters
tit-tarts. Fiyrantine Condor}. Nest intrusions.

b. tS.-'-"RL-'L USA. .L't. US. CAN. GER. NZL} Enabling C‘oiiiptitci Nome-ti. .thttacl-t {UNA} Deiit-cr
intelligence. access. and dual-use capabilities in Support of LRS. computer network attack objectives.

c {Si-"Si i Foreign Intelligence Services Cit-'ber Threat Activates; Dell‘t'ct‘ intelligence on the capabilities.
vulnerabilities. plans and intentions of forcign actors to conduct CNU against USU networks and
those of interest to the USE. Identify what Foreign lrttel Services know about ESE—i capahilitles.
‘."Ult"ltEI'ﬂl)llIIi€S, plans and intentions to conduct CEO China. Russia. Iran. and ai-Qa‘ida.

d iS-"-"S|i Enabling Electronic 1dint-Fine {Flt-Vi Provide cognizance ol‘tlie Fifi-1 environment. signal
detectionu'geoiccation. and characterization through intelligence {FLINT C'O‘t-tiXT. Tech SIGINT]
and other technical in cans to US. EW planners and operators: China- Russia, lran. ll'ﬁqs'ritigl‘itﬂtlsiﬂl'l
llED'si and North Korea

e. {Eli-"Si i Enabling lnii uence Operations: Support US. military deception {.‘i-llLDEF i and psychological
operations it PS YUP). and. inter-agency Strategic C ornmunication ohjeetives to inﬂuence target
behavior and activities Terrorist groups. China. North Korea. Iran. and ‘t-"eneanela.

Accepted Risks:
litiabiing llC‘i'Nlii. Isolated niaiicious activity that could pose a serious threat.
_ Enabling ("NA
1 F13 Ctrbcr Threat: France. Israel. Cuba. lridia. and North Korea.
- . Enabling EW. [producersn'proliteratorsi. Sweden. Japan- Germanic. Israel. and France.
Enabling Influence lifltpierations' Pakistan and Russia.

 

tS.-".-"Sl'} LittlSSlDN: Militarir Modernization: Providing Early Detection til‘Critieal Developments in
Foreign Military Programs.
Focus A was:
a. "lineal posed by continued ntodcniization as it involves the forces turd weapons of: Chain North
Korea. Russta. lran. and Syria.

 

SECRET' 'L'Ul'ilINT.-"-'REL TU Li'Ss‘t. ALE. CAN. GER-320374 12-

 

SECRET-"COMINTC'REL TU LISA. AlfS, FAN. GER-"202m 123

I:-. Activities otistate and non-state actors l_l-_’_,t':l}-' ai'iiis dealers} in supplying advanced conventional
iii-canons
c. Threats posed by foreign space and counter-space systems. China and Russia.
Accepted Risks:
a \h’eapons and force doi'elopiiients in; Saudi Araina. and India
Ii 'I'Iireais posed by foreign space and counter- space s}-'3teins India and France

tS.-".-'SI} J. MISSION: Emerging Strategic Technologies: Preventing Technological Surprise.

Focus Areas: Criticai technologies that could provide a strategic military. economic. or political
ads-outage: high energy lasers. low energy lasers. advances in computing and iniiorniation technology.
directed energy weapons. stealth and counter-stealth. electronic ‘i‘i'ﬂI‘IE-lI'E technologies. space and remote
sensing. electro-oprics. nanotechnologies. energetic materials The emerging strategic technologi- ihrent is
expected to come mainly From Russia. China. Indra. Japan. thl'l‘tlt-ttlji”. l-‘r'anee. Korea. Israel. Singapore. and
Sweden.

Accepted Risks: Technological advances andr'or hasn: seer develop-in out on a global basis elsewhere.

 

tS.-".-"Sl'} K. MISSION: Foreign Policy {(includes Intention of Nations and Multinational 0:35)):
Ensuring Diplomatic Advantage for the [5.

Focus Areas: Positions. objeciii'es. programs. and actions on the part ol‘ governments or multilateral
organizations that could significantly impact US. national security interests. China. Russia. France,
Germain-u Japan. Eran. Israel. Saudi Arabia. North Korea. Afghanistan. Iraq. LIN. ‘I-"eriezuela. Syria.
Turin-x .‘ln'lL'XIL‘O. South Korea. India and Pakistan.

Accepted Risks: Positions. objectives. programs. and actions on the part ot‘goi'enimcnts or multilateral
organizations that could impact US foreign policy or security interests: Taiwan.

tS-".-"Sl} L. MISSION: Energy Sectiriu: Ensuringa Steady and Reliable Energy Supply for the US.
Focus A reaa: Thrcats to LI‘IL‘ produc ti on and global distribution-tron sportation oi‘cncrgy supplies ol‘: liut].
Saudi Arabia. 1|i.-'-::ra:zui:la. Iran. Russia and Nigeria. .-\ccepted Risks: Global impact ot‘rlie state ot‘cnergy
industries to Mexico and (hate.

 

tEi".-"SI_} M. h'IISSION: Foreign Intelligence, (Tounteriutclligence; [Jeniai Si {Jcceptiori Activities:
Countering |-'oreign lntelligenee'l'h reats.

Focus Areas: Espionage-"intelligence collection operations and niariipulaiiori-"iritltieriee operations
conducted by foreign intelligence sereiccs directed against US government. military. science d:
technology and Intelligence Community from; China. Russia. Cuba. Israel. Iran. Pakistan. North Korea
France. Venezuela. and South Korea

Accepted Risks: Espionage-"intelligeiice collection operations against [IS gm'eriiiiienL l'l‘tiiiti-JJT. science
8: technoiogy and Intelligence Coinnniniry t'roiii' 'I'aiwan and Saudi Arabia

SECRET' 'L'Ul'iIINT.-"-'REL TD USA. ALE. BAN. GER-320294 123

 

SECRET-"COMINTC'REL T0 USA. AIR, FAN. GBR-‘ECCS'I 123

(S.-".-'.'Sl } N. MISSION: Narcotics and Transnational Criminal St'ndicatea and Networks: Mitigating
the impact on US. national interests from drug trafﬁcking organizations (UFOs) and transnational
criminal syndicates and networks (TEENS).
Focus Areas:

3. DTOs and annotated enabling activities in Afghanistan. Mexico and Colombia that threaten

US. interests.

h. TCSNS liased in (or originating in) Russia that threaten [35. or allied interests.

1:. iii-tone): laundering that Lteriet‘ita 11’:st Wlliilli. into, and out of Colombia and Meaico.

d. ('riminal facilitators acting as a nexus between crimet'narcotica and terrorism.

e. State-sponsored money laundering by Iran and North Korea.
Accepted Risks:

a Drug prod:tetinit-"trafﬁcking within the Golden Triangle. |Lﬂitina. and North Korea

b 'II'SNS operating in Central Asia. t‘onner Eastem Europe. and ."taia

e Crunma] aaaoeialed money iauntiermg in Afghanistan. and Iraq.
Slate-sponsored money |'.'ittttt'iet'irti_..r by Syria.

(S.".-"Si}0. h‘lISSION: Economic Stabilityt'lnﬂuence: Ensuring [1.5. Economic Advantage and Policyr
Strategies.

Focus Areas: Economic stability. ﬁnancial t-‘ulnerability. and economic inﬂuence of states ofatrategic
interest to the US' China. Japan. Iraq_ and Brazil

Accepted Risks: Economic stabtiily. Financial vulnerability; and economic inﬂuence ol'states oi‘strategie
interest to the US. 'l‘urkey and India.

(Si-'51} P. Mission: Global Signals Cognizance: The core communications infrastructure and global
network in Formation needed to achieve and maintain baseline know: ledge. Capture knowledge of
ioeation. Ciiﬂl'ﬂClEfi?ﬂllt}l‘I. use. and status ol‘ military and civil connnunicationa inti'astructure. Including.
command. control. communications and computer networka: Intelligence. sun-etllanee. reconnaissance and
targeting systems; and aaaoctatcd structures incidental to parsntntj. Strategic h-ltssron List priorities. Foe us
ot'tnrsston ts creating knowledge databases that enable SIGINT efforts against future unanticipated threats
and allow continuity on economy of force targets not currently included on the Strategic h-lissron List.
Fo en a A reaa:

Global Elit-it'tmmﬁlil Lnonlcdgt

Signals knowledge.

Network knowledge.
Target knowledge.

Accepted Risks: Degree nt'maturity may greatly \-t11‘_~,'lt}-'tat'L_tEI

.-

SECRET' 'L'Ul'tlINTs'V'REL TD USA. ALE. CAN. GER-331:1?“ 123

 

SECRET-"FOMINTC'REL TU USA. ALE, FAX. GER-"202m 123

(U) ll. Strategic Mission List - Enduring Targets

{Si-SI t A. MISSION: China: Enabling ILS. policy and avoiding strategic surprise. Focus Areas:
Provide. [.75. decision makers Wltl‘l a holistic SIGINT perspectit'e ot'trends and developments in (him.
assessing andr'or predicting strategic direction. plans. intentions. and capabilities that impact Ll 5i interests.
Such analysis must consider lChina‘s strategic foreign and economic pohcg. trends that impact U S.
interests or degrade L. .3 inﬂuence. the pace. scope. doctrine. and economic SLlSidlllﬂb!lil}' ot‘f‘hma‘s
military- moderrnaation. the proliferation ol‘ PRC weapons and technology; the prospects tor regional
conﬂict or strategic. one] or attack; domestic economic transt'onn anon and its con sequences for econ omie.
political. and social Sitiblllift-‘_ subversive threats to US. institutions through hostile intelligence and
information operations; and the Interdependencies among these det'elopments. Accepted Risks: Fertatn
domestic problem sets. such as demographic issues. lower-level political institutional tLtI‘D‘ivlli; civil society
issues Such as crinte and human rights; environmental problems and pianning; and agricultural production
and food security: Also. issues that transcend national boundaries. such as Chinese involvement in
international organized crime. energy demand. production. and acquisition; and tut‘ecttous disease and
health.

(Silt-ll} B. MISSION: 'Niorth Kore: : Enabling the US to counteract North Korea’s
developmentfusefproliferation of‘tlr'l'lD. deter its aggression, and shape its behavior while
maintaining ILS. readiness for collapset'war. Focus Areas: Provide LUS. decision-makers with a holistic
SIGHT perspective ot‘trends and developments in \orth Korea. assessth and-"or predicting strategic
direction. plans intentions. :1an capabilities that impact US interests and protidc naming. ot‘strategic
threat Such analysts must eonsrder the Sttlblllﬁi' oil the North Korean regime and how It ctttplos's domestic
and foreign policies to maintain its grip on power; the relationship between regime stability-behavior and
its access to income Front illicit aeticities and weapons proliferation; hon Flttitese and South Korean
"carrots and sticks" enable or constrain North Korean behavior; the impact of the ciecazu'iltr:1 North Korean
economy.- on rttilitarjr readiness; and how the interplay hem-ecu l_.' S policy initiatit-es toward North Korea
and all ot‘the abet-e elements at't'eet North Korea’s strategic calculus. the material disposition of its nuclear
weapons. and the status of its military Accepted Risks: For domestic issues. risks include non-defense
oriented industrial production demographic issues. and em n'onntental problems. Regarding issues that
transcend borders. risks include itott—couttteritttelligence associated lies between North Korean state—
spoitsored illicit activities and intcntattoital organized crttnc institutions and tndit‘tduals- Xorth Korean
agent activity In South Korea and Japan; non—state sponsored eon—notion and illicit behavior; and North
Korean economic refugee flows into China

 

(Si.-".-"Sl} C. MISSION: Iraq: Enabling Coalition efforts to assist Iraq in establishing a secure, uniﬁed,
democratic. and sovereign state. Focus Areas: Provide U S decision makers u-‘nh a holistic SIUENT
perspective ol‘lrcnds and developments. assessing [Inn's progress toward establishing a t-‘ittl'tle. stahle
government. securing public order. suppressing utsra‘gent opposition. ensuring rehsote access to basic
sen-ices and commodities; safeguarding strategic resources; and rtlfiiﬂl‘ll‘lil a more sound economic footing
Provide intelligence on rclccant factors. forces. leaders. and regional actors to laminate LES. UB‘L-‘L‘ﬁll't‘tlfni

SECRET' 'L'Ul'ilINT.-"-'REL TU Li'Ss‘t. ALE. CAN. GER-3202‘?” 12-

 

SECRET-"FOMINTC'REL TU USA. ALE, FAX. GER-"202m 123

policy or actions in support of the Iraqi process and to seize the strattgic conuntun ‘attons iintiatn‘c.
Accepted Risks: none

t'S.-".-"Sl'} D. MISSION: Iran: Enabling policymakers in preventing Iran from achieving its regional
(luminance objectives and pursuing policies that impact LLS. global interests. Focus Areas: Provide
U S decision makers with a holistic SIGHT perspective oi" regional Irenrls and derelopitients. assessing
and-or predicting strategic direction. plans. intentions and capabilities that impact US. interests. Assess
irun's foreign policy trends and leadership intentions that impact LLB. interests or degrade US. tnlluenee.
Provide naming of lran's capability to produce a nuclear weapon or its plans to use tet‘rortst surrogates to
attack Israel or [l S. forces and interests Assess the regime‘s progress in initiatives that enhance its pursttit
ol‘ regional port-er ohjeetites in the political. economic. energy. and religious or ideological arenas
Proridc indicators of regime stabilirjt' and-'or susceptibility to democratic reform initiatives Accepted
l-tislts: Ijt‘l‘otts to ascertain the scope ot‘lran's narcotics-'orgattitted crunc elements and economic
stahilint-"inﬂuence.

(Si-El} E. MISSION: Russia: Assn ring diplomatic and strategic advantage and avoiding critical
surprise. Focus Areas: Pro-ride [IS policy and decision makers 1with a holisttc SIGHT perspectn-‘e ot'
derelopments and trends in Russia. asse ssing and-"or predicting strategic direction. plans. intentions. and
capabilities that impact U S. interests Such analysis must consider Russia's strategic foreign policy and
economic intentions and actions as the}.- pertain to U S interests and influence in the region and globally:
the strength oi" Russia's economy and its impact on Russian IJOWCI' protection capability and strategic
positioning; Russia's el‘t‘orts to regain nnlitary strength and stimulate economic growth through the
derelopmcnt and sale at advanced technology and weaponry. and the role of iii-"MD organized crime and
cottntertntelhgcncc In enabling Russian strategic Inltiatn'es. Accepted Risks: Certain domestic. issues
such as demographics, regional politics. det-'eloptttent ot'civil society,r in the country. and monitoring of
low-level military training activities. Also, issues that transcend nationa] boundaries such as Russia’s
plans. intentions and capabilities regarding inﬂuence on the l'onner Soriet space.

lS.-".-'Sl} F. MISSION: 1Venezuela: Enabling policymakers in preventing Venezuela from achieving its
regional leadership objectives and pursuing policies that negativeljr impact 17.5. global interests.
Focus Areas: Provide Li S. deetsuin makers with a holistic SIGINT perspective ot‘regional trends and
dBi'Blel‘l‘tBl‘llS, assessing arid-"or predicting strategic direction, plans. intentions and capabilities that impact
Li S. interests Assess Venezuela's Foreign policy trends and leadership intentions that impact ll};
interests or degrade U S inﬂuence .-"tssess Chat-e7." progress in his initiatires to pursue regional power
oiiicetii'cs in the political. economic. energy. and ideological arenas. Provide indicators ol’tegnne

slain hty. particularly in the energy sector. Assess the depth and breadth ol‘i-‘enezueia's relations with
countries of strategic concern to the L'nttcd States. particularly lran. Cuba. {'htna. and Russia. Accepted
Risks: Etl'ot'ts to ascertain the scope ot'h’cnczueia's narcotics-"orgamzed crune elements and eeonounc
stahihty.-"int'luence.

 

SECRET' 'L'Ul'illNT.-"-'REL TU Li'Ss‘t. ALE. iii-EN. GER-320374 12-

 

