 

 

(TSﬂSE/Q’HEL} MHS and GISHQ “Get in the Game” with Target Development for
liiﬁ'orl'cl of Warcraft Online Gaming

(TS/ISIIIREL) Although online gaming may seem like an innocuous form of
entertainment, when the basic features and capabilities are examined, it could
potentially become a target-rich communication network. Online gaming represents a
technology that is rapidly growing in popularity worldwide. World of Warcraft (WoW) is
one with an impressive following of gaming enthusiasts. With over 10 million users
worldwide, WOW may be providing SIGINT targets a way to hide in plain sight. Targets
have been spotted receiving “no reply” emails from gaming providers and GCHQ
analysts have correlated known SIGINT targets to online gaming events. The New
Mission Development Center at MHS, the Global Network Exploitation (OPD-GNE) and
the Applied Research Special Topics (B18) organization at GCHQ are working together

x]

TOP SECRETHCDMNTHREL TO LlSﬂ, F‘v'E‘f

te filter the FDRHSAT survev environment fer this traffic and extract varieus tvpes ef
WeW rnetadata ferSlGlNT develcpment and netwcirlt ltnewledge enrichment.

[U] Cemmunicatien is at the care pf enline gaming
and in WeW there are manv wavs th
cemmunicate and interact in ihe virtual werld. A
plaver has a character ID anti can jein different
greups. A "partv" hrings plavers tcigether fer a
cemmen, defined purpese er guest. It is
temperarv anti taslt—ciriented. "Guilds," en the
ether hand, are far characters with persisting
relatienships anti can take an an erganizaticinal
structure with ranlts anti pdsiticins. The guild is
mere permanent anti idedlcigical. Characters can
cemmunicate ver‘pallv and nen-verhallv and may
set up different types ef channels tci tallt within a
guild er privatelv, characterth character.

    

4'
a.
(U) Warld charcraft

[TSHSIHRELJ GCHD recentlv aslred rleS's New lvlissien Develdpment Center [NivllZiCji
te suppert an enline gaming research effert fecusing en WeW. Eager th assist in a new
petential area pf target develepment. the NileC discussed metadata needs with GCHD
in cirder tci enahle WdW target and FIEt'U'IIDi'H research in the FDRHSAT arena. The
valDC engaged SHORT, an epen seurce packet—sniffing seftware, which runs an all
FERN SAT survev pacltet data, te filter dut WdW pacltets. GEHG! previded several
WeW pretecel parsing scripts th precess the traffic and preduce Warcraft metadata frem
all vallZiC FDRNSAT survev. These legs are new peing fenuvarded paclt th ECHD fer
additienal analvsis, target develepment and netwerlt Hnewledge enrichment. Elv fusing
infermatien frem different svstems, databases, and reseurces GCHD has cerrelated
target entities th WeW legen events and centinues th unccrverpetential SIGINT value pv
identifving acceunts, characters, and guilds related th Islamic Extremist Greups, Nuclear
Preliferatidn and Arms Dealing.

[TSHSIHRELJ WeW certainlv prevides entertainment fer a large number ef peciple
werldwide, put its gaming fennat can previde a virtual erganizatienal platfcirm fer
pcitential SIGINT targets as well. Furthermere, this techneldgv can assist the target and
simultaneciuslv assist the SIGINT cemmunitv in traclting that target. The WeW gaming
infrastructure prevides ample infdrmatien fer netwerlt develepment thrdugh the data
passed during WeW messages, such as cduntrv and time :ene infennaticin, ldcal IP
addresses and realm server addresses. In terms pf active target develepment, there are
clear parallels: tradilicinal SIGHan develcipment mav felldw emails, chat and huddv lists,
whereas WeW target develepment mav fellew character IDs and legens, gaming
cdmmunicatien channels and guilds.

[TSHSIHREL] MHS and GCHD will EIZIr‘Itlf‘ILiE tIZI develcip and EIZIIIEIIZIIZITE’EE IZIf‘I tl‘IlS
petentiallv lucrative venue.

TOP SECREI'HCCIMNTHREL TD LlSﬂ, F‘U’E‘f E

TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL//20320108

Derived From: NSA/CSSM 1-52
Dated: 20070108
Declassify On: 20320108
TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL//20320108

TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL//20320108

TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL//20320108

Emma-3: A Lnuis in Emerging Tram};
Uaaa. Imam; and Uppurzunizlz-ea
in inﬂuenza .;\££}::*I£ia-3

 

Games: A Look at Emerging Trends, Uses, Threats and Opportunities in Inﬂuence Activities

CHAPTER 1

n and Funriiun
,f-‘m Juterarliva
:2 Medium

Pm-MmaSeooﬂUUfEGamer'mg

 

FOUO — Not for Public Distribution
Page 5

Global Patterns in Game Play: Time Spent, Social Interaction and Reach

Games consume a great deal of time and eﬁ‘ort by a signiﬁcant number of players around the world. In a
study done by Nick Y ee at Stanford University on Massively Multiplayer Online Role Playing Games
(MMORPG) users, 50% of the 30,000 respondents worked full time, with only 22% as full-time students.
The average age of the respondents was 26.5, (women tended to be older than me) and on average the
respondents spent 22. 71 lzours per week in their clzosen MMORPG, a time imiolvement which suggests
that tlzere is a substantial level of emotional investment in the MMORPG environment.

Global Market

Palestinian
Market

Southwest &
Southeast
Asian Markets

Counter-Strike is considered the most popular online first-person shooter
(FPS) game in the world with the more than 200.000 players playing
simultaneously and contributing more than 5.5 billion minutes of playing
time each month on the official network consisting of more than 100.000
serversfk Caimter-Strike is played extensively throughout Central.
Southeast. and Southwest Asia in addition to the core U.S.. European and
Asian markets.*

Reportedly. more than 25% of children between the ages of 6 and 17 in the
Palestinian territories access the Internet through Internet centers that have
emerged in refugee camps. rural Villages. and urban areas. Palestinian
Internet center managers and computer lab owners have reported that most
children spend most of their time playing online games. including “pro-
Arab” games like Special Force and Under Siege.

Kuma Games produces and distributes episodic games depicting real life
military operations. These games are played throughout Southeast and
Southwest Asia. During the height of media coverage on Middle East
networks like Al-Jazeera. 20% of Kuma‘s total audience originated from
the Middle East region with significant amounts of game traffic coming
from Egypt and a notable number of players originating from Iran and Iraq.
[See.‘ End Note xxvii]

 

http://www.Vnetnews.c0m/artic1es/0,7340,L—3056735,00.htm1
htgp://in.rediff.c0m/netguide/2003/0ct/05flash.htm

 

htgp://research.microsoft.c0m/~shahrami/papers/techOZ.pdf#search='mixed%20reality%20gaming

htgp://www.machinima.c0m/films.php?id=4676

WWW.fraps.com

Features of Fraps Real-time Video Capture Software

Screen capturing — Digital images taken by the software recording the Visible
items on the monitor as a screenshot in formats such as BMP. PNG and J PG.

Real-time video capturing — Digital images taken by the software recording the
visible items on the monitor (or another Visual output device) over an extended
period of time. as the action is taking place. to form a video file.

Screencast/Screen Recording — Digital recording of a computer screen output.
often containing audio narration.

 

Games: A Look at Emerging Trends, Uses, Threats and Opportunities in Inﬂuence Activities

CHAPTER 2

Why Sauna; are EJI
Effective Jnﬂuence PJEthUIm

Compiled photos from Giobat Islamic Media Front's
Qaest I'OJ'Bhtsh - The Night of Bush Capturing Game

 

FOUO — Not for Public Distribution
Page 15

Video games are “weaponized” texts, or disrupters of psychic stability. . .I mean to say
that games perform What Pierre Bourdieu calls “symbolic violence”—in other words, that
“gentle, invisible form of violence, which is never recognized as such.”. .. Like
educational institutions, video games are instances of symbolic violence in the sense that
they inflict themselves on players. The world of the video game is nothing more than the

on—screen rendering of programmed instructions and decrees. Players are “schooled” by
an aggressive bombardment of pixellated images and sounds. Every moment is a direct
imperative, an attack that demands a response.

—— Matt Garite,
The Ideology of Interactivity (or, Video Games and the Taylorization of Leisure) XXX"

 

Application of the Learning Framework to Games

 

 

Reflection

The Learning Framework
1990—1995 Praead l<aira

— Unlearning —> Openness —

 

 

 

 

 

 

C o n d i ti oni ng . - lirlanifeata ti on
(Current Reality) Lifelong (Desired Future State)

 

 

 

 

 

Environment

 

| Learning |

Nurturing the
Individual

L lneti n ctive

Learning

Influencing the
External
Environment

_l

‘— - Coaching

 

 

 

 

Openness: When an individual plays a game, he is open to its structures, rules and
messages.

Action: By nature, games present a problem that a player must address and act on in
order to advance in the game. Actions must take place Within the rules and value
systems of the game (in this diagram, the game is represented by the box
“Environment”) in order for the player to participate and move forward in the game.

a.

b.

Manifestation: The player’s desired outcome in the game is to succeed and
mitigate losses.

Inﬂuencing the external environment: The player takes action to try to
influence the course of the game.

Coaching: The rules of the game provide guidelines on how to take action and
What is permissible and acceptable.

Instinctive learning: When quick action is required, instincts will play a role in
how play is performed. This often includes a mix of: lessons learned from past
experiences, a player’s personal values system, and physical and emotional
reactions. This part of learning is generally subconscious.

Nurturing the individual: Assessments about how well the player is playing
the game are made frequently throughout the game.

 

f. Conditioning: The player’s actions result in an outcome, which can be the
desired outcome, a different yet positive outcome, or a negative outcome.

Reflection: In the wake of the outcome, a player consciously or subconsciously
makes an assessment about what worked, what didn’t work, what could be
improved, and how to take action differently in the future.

Unlearning to Openness: Reflection enables the “unlearning” of decisions and
actions taken in the previous game and creates openness to trying again to
succeed. This completes one learning cycle and starts another.

 

XXXV

 

Learning = Action + Feedback + Reﬂection

 

We


‘ m.i ,L L
l ‘
i‘

I (/2:
"5 M

 

Games: A Look at Emerging Trends, Uses, Threats and Opportunities in Inﬂuence Activities

CHAPTER 3

PJauai‘oJ
the U

mm-wmmmmm

 

FOUO — Not for Public Distribution
Page 25

Potential Uses of Games for Terrorist Activities

Propaganda and Inﬂuence - Terrorists and sympathizers use games to twist historical
context. demonize enemies. disrupt the social moral compass. and propagate ideology.

Communications - Games provide attractive communications channels for terrorist groups
and sympathizers because in-game conversations often are difficult to monitor.

Recruiting - Online gaming can serve as a recruiting tool. For example. the United States
Army found that 28% of players logging on to play its America’s Army online game also
visited the corresponding recruitment site.

Simulation, Practice and Team Management - Games can supplement field training by
familiarizing recruits with the tactics. weaponry. and skills needed to conduct operations
and planning.

Money Laundering and F undraising - Funds used in online games can be uploaded in one
location and downloaded in another by using a single avatar to which multiple people have
access via ID and password. Alternately. virtual “sweat shops” can be organized to

 

 

 

Exhibit 3-1: Best Uses of Game Genres in Inﬂuence Efforts§

Simulation Mone

Genre of Enable m Launderin/ Proaanda Tool for
Game Communication Trainin Fund Raisin and Influence Recruitment

First-person
Shooter

Educational 

Mixed or

Reality

nut-n:-

or MUVES

ﬂaunt:
Games

- Ideal or good use

- Could be used but requires moderate effort and would be only somewhat effective

- Could be used but would not be an effective choice from a cost/benefit standpoint

 

 

 

 

 

Guild In-game a: Team at Work‘xii

“. . .A guild is a collection of players who come together to share knowledge, resources,
and manpower. To run a large one, a guild master must be adept at many skills:
attracting, evaluating, and recruiting new members; creating apprenticeship programs;
orchestrating group strategy; and adjudicating disputes. Guilds routinely splinter over
petty squabbles and other basic failures of management; the master must resolve them

without losing valuable members, who can easily quit and join a rival guild. Never mind
the virtual surroundings; these conditions provide real—world training a manager can
apply directly in the workplace...”

--Taken from:

You Play World of Warcraft? You’re Hired!
by John Seeley Brown and Douglas Thomas
Wired Magazine

 

 

Virtual Worlds and MMORPGS as a Film Set
Machinima.‘ From Game space to Video

Gaming can serve as a platform for propaganda video production. For example,
machinima is filmmaking within the real—time 3D virtual environment of a video game.
All that is required is a game and a desktop computer.lxw The combination of machinima
software and a virtual world or video game such as Planer Battleﬁeld, allows one to film
their in—game activities as they play to develop a film which is easily distributed over the
Internet.

Terrorists could easily exploit this technology. Through the use of virtual
characters and audio mash—ups a terrorist could anonymously create machinima films that
included speeches, updates, and briefings. He could use the technology of virtual
communities to create target sites to convey to cell members the next planned attack, use
games to give a visual plan of how the attack should be carried out, and familiarize
teammates with the terrain of the intended site with the technology of Second Life.
Additionally, one could use machinima to create a likable, militant hero with whom their
target audience could identify.

H Durin the month of December, SAIC anal sts eriodicall checked e-Ba for characters and items for

 

This technology, combined with audio mash—ups, also could be easily used to
incorporate the voices of key heads of state, the US President for example, into anti—US
propaganda. An original speech could be tampered to craft new, unfavorable messages.

Exhibit 3-4: Planet Battleﬁeld; universal resource link located at:

 

Shﬂwmﬂmmﬁmmmm

III! BﬁlES/ E1111 IJEMD

 

mm acame ¥
PEEBES 5am: HP

 

 , piegas-jnadsm
ywmmmm-ﬂmmm
mammlsodedmsmwsmnleres
«IRE

 

mmmmmmmma
mmnoopoonmwm
mammmweehypﬁzes.

Leammmmbohym.

"'ilFIlIII"' "'I!IIIIIF"'

 

sunranusméﬁﬁ

Isa-mamm-

Thanh. Day

‘SumuronSeasonumdlnda
mmmm

Searching for a Cache

Example
50 Mrles from F'noenlzn' Anzona

 

Exhibit 3-6: Screen Shots for Searching for a Cache

fw/JL \._‘“
a:

. Nevada

|_ 0 m' | Clegc
200 km

Theoreﬁca

Geocached
Component
Locaﬁons

54:11.1 Fe

New
Mexuco

HI‘BICS
_l

 

mm. ‘
LJ

Simulation Scenario

This scwmrio isﬁciiiious. A terrorist leader wants to stage a biological and chemical
attack on several Washington. DC. Metro stations simultaneously. The cell leader would
like to simulate all stages of such an attack including the construction. transportation and
implementation of the plan. Basic benefits of a simulated attack include:

Cell members use virtual simulation to monitor times and locations to carry out
an attack across multiple stations.

Cell members use virtual simulation to case the environment prior to the attack in
order to identify and mitigate potential obstacles.

The cell leader is able to integrate digital imagery and simulated sounds to
acclimate operators in order that they execute the attack more effectively.

Mapping programs such as Google earth can be integrated into online simulation games
to reconstruct streets. buildings and other topographical features near potential attack
sites.

0 The cell leader integrates information provided by the city inspector’s office.
including actual building codes and utility locations to generate more accurate
game construction.

A software program that simulates hospital and laboratory environments is uploaded into
the game space. The software is intended for training medical staff and laboratory
technicians about safe handling and storage of dangerous chemicals and biological
agents. It also trains first responders on containing spills. Cell members use this
program to learn safe handling. transport and deployment of the chemical and biological
agents they will use.

 

Each member knows their roles and what their colleagues will be doing
simultaneously.

They practice scenarios that may occur during the mi. ion and determine how to
act.

They are now less susceptible to surprises.

Through research and in— game simulation. it is determined that maximum impact can be
expected using three bombers in each of four Metro stations —— Metro Center, Gallery
Place. Union Station. Capitol South. and L’Enfant —— at 8:45 AM on a Tuesday in late—
March. Each cell member knows their responsibilities and the timing on their
movements.

Knowledge-Based Game Scenario
This S‘Cé’lldl‘iO isgﬁ'ciiiious. Al—Aqsa Martyrs Brigade would like to teach children about
the Israeli—Palestinian conﬂict. The group knows that vivid. interactive games are likely
to entertain children while providing an effective education platform. They develop a
game from the Palestinian point—of—view that distorts history by embellishing atrocities
committed by the Israelis. and minimizing culpability of the Palestinians.

0 In order to win the game. the young player must answer questions correctly to

save his family and friends.

A correct answer. as deemed by the sympathizer. gets the child one step closer to
Paradise.

During each scenario. there are questions about religion. Israeli beliefs and moral
res onsibilit [see below].

 

You thank the freedom fighter, but resign yourself to live under Israeli occupation. Your
father would understand. You are trying to protect yourself and younger brother,
although you know that the Israeli forces could come again at any time.

Your family has already been destroyed and you do not want to worsen the situation.

Beware, however, as your failure to join the Islamic resistance essentially means that you
are complying with the Zionist occupation.

You volunteer to serve the jihad as a suicide bomber. This is an honorable post. You will
be rewarded and your family will be protected. You will be a hero in your community.

 

Games: A Look at Emerging Trends, Uses, Threats and Opportunities in Inﬂuence Activities

CHAPTER 4

Emerging Trend-:3 in the
ﬂaming Space

Praia m Gena-a]. Motors 3—D Virtual
Whammy Press Release

 

FOUO — Not for Public Distribution
Page 42

 

Online Video Game
Subscribers - US. 77.8 75.0 50.0 38.1 32.8 24.7 20.8 16.4 14.8 21.7
Online Video Game
Subscribers - Asia 133.3 71.4 66.7 50.0 33.3 25.0 32.0 24.2 19.5 26.7

Online Video Game
Subscribers - EMEA 150.0 180.0 78.6 50.0 50.0  25.0 20.0 35.1

 

http://www.daniweb.com/techtalkforums/post180324.html#post180324

 

Wireless game subscribers -
U.S. -- 14. 4.2 -18.9 -26.5 -17.3 37.1
Wireless game subscribers -
Asia -28.4 49.7 -72.5 -15.2 -24.3 -18.5 -22.6 -13.5 31.8
Wireless game subscribers -
EMEA 100.0 155.9 9 43.9 32.1 25.5 21.1 37.1

I. I')'\lv\
IDvn
(.I‘RS
lxR’l’rl‘
HM il'.
[WI 
lxl:\' I)( \

llSl')l’.‘\
lxliV DY

Shuldunl

Imxnyl»
mu m H

Full nmlmn \ "ll-n.

1| llllwpu

“'l mllvr [1):

nich mm v.

[Hull In lull».

"»l\ ' 1n1:4:{v>,\\‘v|>lnn\\\mg{ >hml
.unlu: \‘nlw Ch

:unl mi!" Innv (I: Am]: ml»

mnan mum',

.’~I) running. lush-1W. sh l‘lt‘-\\'<IIIE!

(m (irmmhl \1<|wn. \ulwu‘lulll'lml‘mg'

- l 115'}: thn‘ rmuunmy \ id's-J. llli'll

(plzllltv\lllmn'ullll‘lrll<111:1.\uu‘v mm
H’ k‘lt'pllﬁnl'

 

 

     
  

Dark Age of Camelot
World of Warcraft (US)
World of Warcraft (EU)
Second Life

Auto Assault

Everquest

Dungeons and Dragons
Everquest II

Final Fantasy XI

Star Wars Galaxies

Dark Age of Camelot
World of Warcraft (US)
World of Warcraft (EU)
Second Life

Auto Assault

Everquest

Dungeons and Dragons
Everquest II

Final Fantasy XI

Star Wars Galaxies

0.71

0.46

0.033

0.014

0.013
0.000237
0.00015
0.000148
0.0000269
0.00000104

0.739
0.689
0.0126
0.00795
0.00784

0.00143

0.0000551

937.058
607.108

43.553
18.411
17.157

0.546
0.354
0.0254
0.0107
0.0100
0.000182
0.000115
0.000114
0.0000207
0.0000008

    
 

0.188
0.0795
0.0741

0.00135
0.00086
0.00084
0.000153

0.000006

43.257
28.0255
2.0105

   
  
 
   
   

    
 

0.258
0.109
0.101
0.00185
0.00117
0.00116
0.00021

0.00000812

Second Life‘s content creation engine and LSL feature allows residents to create virtually
anything. protected by very real intellectual property rights. These tools and subsequent
intellectual property protections have spurred the growth of a goods and services industry
including entrepreneurs (e.g. real estate moguls). artisans (e.g. architects and fashion
designers) and professional services (e.g. notary public). stimulating an economy
generating nearly $5 million in trade between residents every month. The Second Life‘s
content creation engine and LSL features also enable residents to be creative and have fun
with other residents. One of the more notable examples of unique content is the
abductions of residents by aliens whereby abductees receive a T-shirt proclaiming “I was
abducted by Aliens.”

Second Life enjoys 90.000 hours of use per day. with approximately 25% of that time
spent creating. That equates to ll user/years per day. which would require a 4.100-
member content development team costing $40 million per year. In a given week, 5,000
distinct residents wrote original scripts (15%). representing 2.5 million lines of source
code.

Second Life allows residents to promulgate any Uniform Resource Locator (URL) audio
or video stream to local communities in Second Life. Second Life also permits users to
export XML data from the game to external web sites. Together. this functionality lets
users stream “real” events into the virtual world and “virtual” events into the real word.

 

ﬁ—b—+—+—r—+—+—+—+—

1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006

 

 

ht;p://www.n0vint.c0m/

ht;p://www.immersion.c0m

Games: A Look at Emerging Trends, Uses, Threats and Opportunities in Inﬂuence Activities

CHAPTER 5

Winning Henri-3.1 and
Mind; WrinnJJg

Photo from Global Islamic Media Front's
Wren-Bud! - The Mrgnrorsush Capthng Gama

 

FOUO — Not for Public Distribution
Page 60

Compete for Players with
New Games

Operations

Analysis

Collecting In- Counter In-
Game Operations Operations Game
Intelligence Propaganda

Exhibit 5-1: Holistic Approach to Game Involvement

 

 

 

 

MJQYSTICK;

 

 

NSA documents on games and virtual worlds
82 Pages - Contributed by Justin Elliott, ProPuinca - Dec 09, 2013

"World of Spycraft: NSA and CIA Spied in Online Games"

Wurk by NSA'S Menwilh Hill Station and GCHQ an Ill-lurid nl' li'nlarrraﬂ H: 13-

.“ffa-IL' .“.F|‘I.‘.~' rl':'|:.l' I'?-'_.'.":1'.' In): .'.H 'L'H {'~r.:.I:L-'  '1:er :'_.*u-,z_'!:‘r:rr.'ﬂ-'i: f:.-.'
'a'L‘ﬂr'ﬂf-J! .'-.':.I"L'-'a-'.".' I'J'I.'.'-'.'r_‘ {Quin-"LI

NSA dacumeht: "Explmlihg Terminal Lise of Games 9. 'L-‘n‘bual anircmn Ellis" (p. 3]

Il-‘- iii: 'I'upir: l-Lxlilujling 'I'url'ul'lsl l'u- ul'ﬂalmn 6'; ‘i'irtunl llmll'nnIm-nh

Intel-focused study Iran-l cmitraclm SAIC an airline games in 5;.

Esme-J: :2 LL51: in: Emerging haunt“.
LL33. In at; and rppurmuzea

:2
in Jnfluanca .i'IELIEiE-J

 

