ﬁ

TOP SECRET/1317mm use, FVEY

National Security Agency! - 3 April 2013
Central Security Service

Information Paper

 

T

Subject: (UIIFOUO) NSA Intelligence Relationship with Canada’
Communications Security Establishment Canada (CSEC) _

(U) Introduction

(U/iFOUO) The U.S.-Canada SIGINT relationship dates back to an alliance formed during World
War ll. in 1949, the relationship was formalized under the CANUSA Agreement signed with
CSEC. The basic tenet of CANUSA is cooperation in all aspects of SIGINT except when
considered prejudicial to the national interests of one of the parties. The forma information
Assurance (IA) relationship with CSEC is based on a 1986 Memorandum of r u reement. NSA
has a close, cooperative relationship with CSEC that both sides would like to ee expanded and
strengthened.

 

 
 

(SI/REL TO USA, CAN» CSEC is a highly valued second party partner. The r lationship is
driven by our mutual interest in the defense of North America as a whole. Coperative efforts
include the exchange of liaison ofﬁcers and integrees, joint projects, shared ativities and a
strong desire for closer collaboration in the area of cyber defense. Since Can a has a limited
ability to produce cryptographic devices, it is a large consumer of US. lA prod cts.

 

 

   

(CIIREL TO USA, FVEY) , g V 1
NS ' “. . ides the continued success of the CANUSA relatinshi in Case: 
s . " are a (2 care we mg re a Ions Ip Wt - gether they ena - proucuve
interactions with Canadian intelligence organizations in support of U.S. lntellig ence Community
goals.- '

 

 

 

Ciassiﬁed By:
Derived From NSAICSS .1-5
Dated: 2087010
Deciassify On: 2038040

TOP SECRET/lSI/lNOFORN

 

 
 
    

TOP SECRETifSl/IREL TO USA, CAN

(U) What NSA provides to the partner:

 

 

  

eve opmen s, crypto ogic capabilities, software and resources for state~of-th ' ,

processing and analytic efforts, and lA capabilities. The intelligence exchang with CSEC covers
worldwide national and transnational targets. No Consolidated Cryptologic P ogram (COP)
money is allocated to CSEC, but NSA at times pays R&D and technology co 3 on shared

' projects with CSEC.

(U) What the partner provides to NSA:

(TSIISIIIIREL TO USA, CAN) CSEC offers resources for advanced collection,;orocessing and

analysis, and has opened covert sites at the request of NS . C shares ‘ ith NS heir
unique geographic access to areas unavailable to the US. and
prowdes cryptographic products, cryptanalysis, technology, and s are. .> as increased

its investment in R&D projects of mutual interest.

 

 

 

 

