TOP SECRETHCDMINTHREL TO USA, FVEYHZOSEU'I 08

(U) SIGINT Mission Strategic
Plan
FY2008-2013

3 October 200'? Release

_Siy.nals lnlelligeuee

Derived From: NSAJCSSM 1-52
Dated: 20070108
Declassify On: 20320108

TOP SECRETUCOMINTHREL TO USA, FVEYHZUSZD’IDB

 

(U) BACKGROUND

 

 

['l_.'.-'.-"Ft_)llt)t America invests itt intelligence programs to detect. and to provide full and timely
answers to questions shoot. the hidden pursuits of persons. states, or organizations. In the case
of signals intelligence tSltilNT'}. tlte espectation is that surveillance of targeted electronic
signals and systems will yield insight that‘s worth the costly capabilities and operations needed
to obtain it. For over 5.0 years. from World war II through the glohal war on terrorism. this
invcsttttettt has been justiﬁed. but the mission is still rightly judged by the answers it delivers.
the implied husincss model is to positiott the mission to cover enough priority targets to ensure a
steady stream olivalued products and services for decision makers and otlter SIGHT consumers.

[Lit 'I'his strategic plan seeks to maintain or enhance the missions value itt light (tithe cltallengcs

and opportunities of the unfolding network age. It frames and establishes several key aims
and assigns responsibility For actions needed to attain them. At the highest let'el. success is
deﬁned as stable or itnproved responsiveness to customer needs. while doing best against the
targets that tnaltcr most and avoiding strategic surptisc.I

[Ll The plan was developed through the on-line collaboration ot‘over 35f] SIGIN'I' practitioners
and partners. Working within a framework created by the chiefSlt'ilN'l‘ strategist. It focuses on a
sntall set ot‘ acts that should pay large dividends. and introduces data-driven processes to track
progress. spot problems. and pt'otttpl adjusuticttls. it's how we‘ll continue to modernize the way
we prepare for. pcrﬁmn. and appraise SIGIN'I' operations in a world in trunsﬁnrmation.

 

 

 

(U) DRIVERS

 

 

 

 

 

[Sit-REL} Since 3003 the intelligence community has been guided by a national intelligence
priorities l'rante'tvods tNlPF} that maps customer needs into bands (A. B. and Cl ot'suecessitely
lower concent. “Band  topics include thosc sn'ategic. asymmetric. and other threats that have
the potential to greatly harm the LIE. or its interests ‘t‘t’ithin each topic. a l-S priority is assigned
to speciﬁc geopolitical or non-stale entities ot‘interest. with i being the highest. Of course. not
all intelligence questions are necessarily best. or even reasonably. probed by SIGNT means.
Potential customers are asked to request SIGINT only when they can characterize its expected
conmbution as supplementary. substantial. key. or esn'aordinar):

[Si-REL} Since October of 2th)“. a national intelligence strategy has provided additional
direction. [ts live overarching mission oltieetives are to defeat tetTorisnt. pres cat and counter the
spread of weapons ol‘mass destruction. holster the growth olidemocracy. pcncu'atc hard targets.
and anticipate developments of strategic concern. Of course. neither these ttor the roster of
"Band A" topics represent a radical shill from prior thinking. For several years. the SIC'ili‘v'l'
system has pursued these issues. inlettsitying efforts to harvest data from eontputels. Internet
traffic. and other packcttzcd communications in the process- As the chiu't shows. there has in

 

(U) the outlined ltl .-'tppeudis .‘\. cud-to-eud pet'lotntauce will ociutlgcd hy attaittitativc :uid qualitative
analysis ofcuslontcr rcthcsLs and mission delit'c tables. and by authoritative customer surveys.

 

TOP SECRETHCOMINTHREL TO USA, FVEYH20320108

that been signiﬁcant growth in the percentage of customer questions. and especially high priority
ones. that are being at least partially answered by sen'alizerl SIGIN'I' reponing.‘

{IIII'I_____-___ _:I_.I.’_.____-.l_._ I'I__.___—_ lJ—I.-._.__‘I 1"] [T‘s-'nd ‘_ II" I."‘.'n"'

L’i-lLH' ‘ Hilttds't' HL-an-tts

.tEiltt.
th1.1.'.-.]:~
-t-I‘.I'.‘i.

4,: lii " II 'si-:
35a; l .Illk . lot] a .

Hand. ("' Requests

llu't'l'TJUO

 

 

new raw o'qu c:- Fr .. " oe- F'r at ::'r a? Fr nan-r e: Fr 31 F'r' :12 F'-' ca F‘I'
suns scat: sec-s seas "  393:3 sass scus sees aros- scc? see-'9 coin

insular rcginics oﬁcn
remains at a premium. as is information about asymmetric. threats such as weapons of mass
destruction. hostile cyher activities. and some terrorist organizations. h-‘loreovcr. past gains are
always under pressure from the relentless evolution ot'targets and technology.

E'l'S.-".-"S].-".-"REL] For instance. as Internet routing. and service nodes become more dispersed. some
lucratii'c SIGIN'I' elml-tcpoittts Vanish and it takes more access points or over-thc-net operations
to maintain the same coverage. As strong cryptography is applied to identity management,
software attestation. protecting data at rest. and securing network meta-data. we must comparath
expand cryptographic enabling sensitive commercial partnerships and cryptanalytic processing
capabilities. As users become more mobile and more anonymous. we must introduce new
association and pattern detection tccltnolog}: lest targets ofintcrcst lie lost or overlooked.

[S--'.-'Sl.-'--"REL} At the same time. global modernization makes intelligence on economic. political.
and other civil issues more valuable. and relevant targets tend to Favor networks. Internet-centric
activities such as e-commerce. e-voting. and on-net industrial and utility control beg. to be mined.
even as we espand existing operations against both public and private nets. Mounting interest in
cvbcr security,- and the on-iine aspects of crime and extremism also spur demand for network
sun eiilance. as well as more interaction with atypical customers sach as state and local
Jaorertunents. and tighter pattnerships with consumers whose can target knowledge can help
steer and interpret collection or a hose operations can be "cued" Lt}- SIGINT.

t'S.-'.-'REI-._t Sonic etTons to recruit. train. and direct Islamic and other extremists are already
entrusted to networks. and so tvill be man}- pians and acts ofthe PRC as it rises to be a near-peer
competitor. Ruling institutions of even rogue states make some use ot'lntcmet technology. as do
the scientists and proliferators with which the}.- ivortt. In fact. I’cwcr and fists-er targets of any
stripe or location are far removed From a colleague. confidant. or contctlcratc that‘s in the know
and on the net.

 

it t "t‘tneslinns" an: ttcl'tnctl here as desired essentmi elements 411' mtnrtnation spectlied In standing
tii'lhlli‘k—T UI l"l.‘~il.\_l' tL'LttIit'etttent-s. 'lilteyte L'uttsitleted "atltll'esseti'i 'I-NltlcllL'iltidittwtittlii‘ulEt'|1llt1ili:ﬁ isstlctl during:
llH.‘ quarter.

TOP SECRETHCOMINTHREL T0 USA, FVEYHZIJSZD‘WB

 

(U) VISION, VECTORS, 8t VALUES

 

 

[Lit Our mission is to answer questions ahout threatening activities that others mean to keep
hidden. This is the essence of what we accomplish for the .Jnneriean people. whether we‘re
supporting the global war on terrorism. inﬁltrating the leadership circles of strategic rivals or
rogue states. or anticipating geopolitical and target technology trends.

tLl-l-"lTDLlDlt Our vision. or aspiration. is to utterly master the foreign intelligence implications of
networks and network technology. Evert conservatise people and institutions find themselves
hat ing to entrust their plans and Operations to networks or else. so limit their ability to acquire
information. issue instructions. and move people. money. materiel. and ideas as to risk
irrelevance. The mission must he planned- equipped. and executed for best effect. against the
objectives that matter most. in this brave new digital world.

[LTt At the heart of the task is the need to sense. and nrake sense of. systems. traffrc. users. and
various types and levels of organizations. This is a circular and fast moving process. \lew
insight leads to better sensing. which leads to still greater insight. and so on — sometimes in
months. but sometimes in minutes.

[Sr‘r‘Slr‘r‘RELt Today. most of what we access goes unexplored or unexploited. Humans can
neither follow network flows in real-time nor forge intelligence gold from an accumulation of
isolated data points whose wonh is only apparent when combined with one another and with
what others may know. Our global sensors need to be able to think for themselves and talk to
one anorher instantaneously. Our processing systems need to automatically ﬁnd meaning in and
across vast and dispersed data sets. Unr analysts need new skills and new tools. and need to
apply them in new ways. often in concert with customers. Our business processes need to
promote data-driven decision—making and more disciplined end-to—end planning.

[lift This will not happen without leadership and the courage to ask ifthe practices and structures
that serve us well today will continue to do so in the litture. .-'\t the satire time. some immutable
values must continue to inﬂuence our daily choices and behavior. :‘tll militaryr and civilian
employees are called to commit to lawﬁrlness. honesty. integrity. fairness. accountability.
loyalty. collaboration. innovation. and learning. .-'\s we in the SIGINET mission grapple with the
peculiar risks and rewards of the times and tasks at hand. a few implications of these
commitments warrant special comment:

r {L'l SlGlN‘l' professionals must hold the moral high ground. even as terrorists or dictators
seek to exploit our freedoms. Some of our adversaries w ill say or do anything to advance
then’ cause: we will not. All employees must have uneompromisirig devotion to personal and
institutional integrity doing the right thing. every time. regardless ofhow difﬁcult it is.

{Ll SlfilN'l' professionals must be honest with themselves. colleagues. superiors. and
oversecrs. When something won't work. isn't working. hasn't worked. or went wrong. we
need to say so. with respect. but also with unmistakable clarity. We then find a different way
forward.

{L} SIGINI' professionals need to grow and prosper as mission assets and as individuals.
We. cneom‘age career-long learning. periodic stretch assignments. and a halanee between
work and home life that horiors duty to family. community. and self as well as to country.

 

 

 

 

(U) KEY AIMS 81 ACTIONS

 

(L?) We seek to maximize the SlGlN'l' mission‘s value to the nation in the contest ol‘ the
intelligence priorities and technological realities ot'tlte network age. liottunately. no tnatter what
streams of operational and engineering initiatives — from the incremental to the tt‘attslhttnational
— are running their course at a particular time. a tiew core structures can channel them for best
ofﬁcer The following goals are intended to do _i ust that. As implementation of the plan proceeds.
the responsibilities described below will be further decomposed into subtaslts for 1carious mission
elements and let-els. Ultimately. muclt ot‘tlte daily work of the SlCulNT enterprise will beneﬁt.
including the immediate mission imperatives presented in Appendix B.

[LI-“:FFDUD} Goal l: Annually improve SlGlh-‘T on NlFF "priority I" tasks and “Band 91" topics
in general, as measured by more even pert-brn'mnce across topics and rising perthnnaoce overall."

ﬁt. {LT} Responsibility- and Accountability: Beginning in October 200?, tlte mission‘s Deputy
Director for Customer Relationships t'DDCR] will assess SlUlNT tnission performance
against MPF "Band A" tasks using methods outlined in Appendis A. th' 1.;va if? ml!
provide the t'rtl'sxt'frmbt senior fenders with rpn'rt'terh' "Hum." .-l " performance repm'ts' can!
qtn‘rrren‘ft' nicotine-prion oftm- or tunict'-.t'uti.rfi'ed "Bond .--'1 " tasks.

{l_-'.-"-"F(Jltl(_)} Responsibility and .-'\ccountabiliry: Beginning in F‘t'lll'l, the DDCR will lead the
missions l—)epnr_'-,r Directors for .-'\nal}-'sis and Production tDD."tPl and Data Acquisition
{DDDAL and Associate Deputy Director for SIGIN'I' Derelopment [ADD SlfiDli‘t-"t through
joint reviews at" tin- or under-satisﬁed "Band  tasks to ﬁnd and address problems. i’ll're
Hill 'R will prurnle the .‘s't’l'ihh-T Director n‘tt‘h quartz-"rift: unpr‘tn‘crttc'm {darts and progress
reports. Including concurrence. ninth-151's. rtmf r’ottmtimn’tm__,i’i'rut1 the Hf)de d.’lr.))rl"l_. rum"
:1! U.) Nt’t'il Mil”,

{l_.'.-".-'F(_)l_l(_)jt Responsibility and .alccountabiliw'. By .-\pn'l 3008. the DDD.--\ will begin
tracking the currettt and expected purpose and (using documented business ntlesl
productivity oi‘ Ii]. End. and 3rd party SIGIN'I' accessesII Hie Dillilri will provide the .H'ftiL-‘H'
ﬁbre: {or trim qmtrreritr L'tHHﬂtH'ISUNS of the "than! .-l " tasks gown to. arm! the tl’I.'t'pt'.l.\'l'll't.lH and
use of the resultant t't'ii’t’c'trntmjrtmi. cuct’t tlL-‘L't’.‘t‘.\'. ftrgitfrgitnttg tm- or trrnt‘ctv.ntt'rs'frcu’ Mauls.
{lL-‘l-"FOLlOl Responsibility and Accountability: Beginning in Frill). the DDDx—‘t will

systematically rcengincer. retire. or replace tdircctly or though a partner} chronically

 

3!

lL'.-'.-'FULTO] While pct-l‘onnance against "Band A" [optcs ts our benchmark. oc utll continue to our}; all
high prioril} tasks. and lesser "Band l3" and "Band 1—" issues nltcn as affordable and plans In our strengths.

I tlL-ﬂ-‘FDI'OJ "Access" as used here tell-rs to data sources that are at least partially funded via the collection

and npcmtinns tm'cstntcnt portt‘olto. 'lhc purpose or producti'titt ot‘ an access may relate to tipplng. steering. or
otltcrutsc enabling utltct collectors. as opp-used [u collccnng targeted information directly. L'niqucncss and
untapped potential are also factors to consider as is the espectcd contribution of an access in the c'L-ent of a
reasonably likely and signiﬁcant Future cnsis or concern.

 

Elf

tindel'lierlbnning accesses. the t’ tt’ lt’ }.--l ii't't'i’ annnattfi‘ provide the .‘i't't iL'V't" t'Jt't'er'ttn‘ it't'ttt a
inttltn'ein' "access enhancement " plan as part attire program htttt'a’ tattle.

{til Responsibility and Accountability: Beginning in F‘t'ttBt the .-\geney"s Chief Technology
Ofﬁcer t'tT'E'OJ --— with the full support of relevant collection. analysis. and customer
engagement elements will start to systematically instrinnent SIGNT tasking ingestion.
pmeessing. analysis. and deliver systems to automatically lag data so that its source and
subsequent processing and handling can be associated with some categmization of its
ultimate use or intelligence value. {lie ("[0 irn’tr provide the .tlge'ttqt‘i't Henna- tetttt'etsttt‘n
u't'tn stunt—amino! reports- an the percentage [3.1;th accessed that can he so associated.

.-'.-'l-'t'}l_lt}} goal 2: Field an analytic it'orkﬁiree that promptly and methodically discovers and

exploits priority secrets entrusted to networks worldwide and helps eustotriers turn this insight
into signiﬁcant national outcomes,

A.

{LI-"I'FOL'Ojt Responsibility and Accountability: Beginning with F‘i'TlS. the CTO will enable
improved information discovery by oneltestratinf=T annual increases in the propottion of newly
acquired and archived data and ineladata that can be readily searched and retrieved by
analysts across the enterprise usingT standard workstations. Hie ('t'i') ti'tt't develop hase'n'ne
tttetttttt'es of ttt'(-'(’.l"~'lhllt’ Jam. attetjt‘ titties. ana’ attetfi' a’t'ti'i't'ttt'ti'. ana’ provide the .H'ttiL-‘t't'
titre: tar n'ttlt annttat' improvement reports. beginning at the can" at t-"l’tta‘i'.

{L'r'E'FOLlD} Responsibility and .Lliecountabilily: lll l""i'l33 and out. the NS.‘~\.-"C'SS Senior
Language and NSA—"C'SS Senior Intelligence Authorities will maintain a global training
requirement for all eQ-']Jtoltigic language and intelligence analysts pet'l’t'irtningI various classes
of missions and liiiictions; will identify the types ol‘ learning activities that meet the
requirement. based on curtan and projected needs and work Force statistics; and will proi ide
data on organizational compliance to SlGlN'T mission and Agency leadership. the J‘s-'51s! ('55

.‘i'enan' language aha" lith’ilt'tru't-Wtc't‘ _-'l rttnarttter and law managers- of relevant ntyatn':attott.~r
u't't’t' t-‘tl.\'ttl‘e‘ that at term Milt-ti of at.“ crtjtyttot’ugte ttttt-'tt’t"eettt'e' ana’ tangttaet' anon-arts trrtt
interim- tn tot} tmm a_t',r.tre.u-rtfiea‘ tarpon-eat prati‘sstanat act'w‘apntt'nt t'l't’t‘l' tti'a 'l't'ti’l'ﬁ. atta‘
that at twist t’tl‘t'é; rit'i’ttn‘enagc' and attelt'tgt’nt'e anaift-ittv wanting the t'ritttttertt-‘rt'nrmn tttt.\'.‘-'J'Utt
u'tt’f he engaged in advanced or .spﬂt'ttﬂti‘t't.’ .t‘t‘rttttlttﬂ at any. given tone.5

. tL:"-"FOUO} Responsibility and Accountability: Beginning in FWJQ. the DDCR and the

DDAP will cultivate client—consultant relationships with more customers to facilitate new
and more productive tasking and consumption ot'SlGlNT products and services. the tilt-JP
u'tt’l tit-ovate ti’n' stat.-vt' therefor ain't on annual“ owner an the number. tit's'pmtttntr anti"
{trit‘tnnt'nti’a’ impart Ufr’tti‘ttiil-Z‘I'l'k' it'f'l'lll'lﬂ ttttitlt-tttne t‘atnnt'tantjt' t'tsstlennti’nts.

{C.-".-"RE[..'] Responsibility and Accountability: Beginning in F‘t'ttR. the DDAP will increase
the practice or" forward deploying analysis into customer not‘kspaces to Facilitate real-lime
analysis and iterative consultation n-‘liere needed. the NIL-it“ u'ttt {innate the Milt-Vt
Ht't'etrtat‘ ii't'tlt tﬂtt'tt‘t‘t.’t‘l_t' sttttttttttrtt'a' aftt'n-r tatttthet‘ amt itit‘tttttn't ttfifttt'Hﬂll'tJ' tltrftt'ttltt‘til tattttftivts
and tt'tet't‘ interatt'rntat' itintat't as Li‘.$'.'i'L’.H-.‘.'L’tl int ens-tamer .i'ta'i‘ei-‘s.

{L7.-"-"l"'0UO} Responsibility and Accountability: Beginning in F3118. the DDAP will
systematically hand off mature analytic tasks to qualiﬁed partners ‘when doing so increases

 

(ll) 'Ihe latter is already a requirement nt‘the \ltltional (Torinterterronsm Intelligence I’lan

 

the effectiveness or eﬁiciency of the resources available to the US govemment and the
STUNT mission. Hie Ir 31' Hi" it'tt’t’ provide the .‘it't .if.-"L"'l" f Jitet'tot' with on ottmmt‘ t'ept'trt on the
tasks so 'jt't?ttt"itt'.re:'t” river the merit-insfiscal tern: t‘n'nr any rec-overeat! resources it'et'e
t'ewttpftn‘ett'. and the t‘ttstottter trimmers i‘if't'ioti'i.

[1.3] lfinal 3: Annually increase the use of husiness cases to allocate pay and non-pa},r dollars and
scarce skills for better returns on investment than altemative— ways ot‘nsing the same. resources."

.4. {LL-"r'l-‘(lLlﬂl Restmnsihility tutd Accountability: Beginning in FY03. the chief SK'ilE’i'l'
strategist will identify those skills that. for lack of'critieal mass. keep us ti‘om meaningfully
migrating to new net centric tools and techniques. even it“ resources are adequate to expand
existing types oft-collection. processing. or analysis operations. Prior to c-‘tt‘L'JrlAl'c‘ttI"..K' program
omit! crate. the elite,“ .S'tt'itt‘v't' strategist n'ti't' pmmt't' itn‘estmetit portfolio managers citth the
.H'i’t't't.-\."t' mission '5' setitor twitter-strip irttt't on ammo! i’tst of work rules it'i’tttse incumbents are
to he considered "nit-tires rest-mt‘t-t-‘s for tins-inma- pitttttimg proposes:

{Ll Responsibility and .i‘teeountahility: Beginning in li‘i’tJB. the DDUR and the ADD
SIGDEV will I'use insight into technology and geopolitical trends and then clearly articulate
the prioritized implications for the SlGlN'l mission. .i’rmt' to melt _t-'ettr's program: httn’if
tattle. the Hill. 'Et' intoI the ANN .‘i'ftr'flt't'l' will provide t'tJresttttt-wi‘ portfolio: ttlt'ﬂlt'tctft'iﬁ' n'itt’t
t’tl'.'i'l’tl:l‘ cottvtttttohfe t‘ttttt' t'tt'tte'mttht'e planning gttttt'tmt'e tittttett' or irritating tet't'ttmi'ogtettf or
.s'tt‘t‘ttegtt' .utr;.tt't'.re tutti tttttt'ttttti‘i' ordering {INFL'HHIIJJ'I :tti'esttttettt.v.

{L't Responsibility and Accountability: Beginning 1with the FYIU-IS program build. the
Collection 5.: Operations. Processing 81: Exploitation- Analysis & Production. and i'vlission
h-‘lanageinenl investment portfolio managers will revalitlale or construct new business cases
covering ever larger proportions of their pa}- and non-pa}; submissions. .-l.~' part (it"mtt'ti
‘1-'I'_'ta'."l.\' pmgt‘utit t'urtttf tjt't't'e. true-Ii oftt’telﬁim' investment Iftlef!_tft-'IZT n'ti’t’ .vm’mttt hum-tom's ("uses
to the .‘x‘t't'itt‘t't' ti'trt-retot' covering more tit—titett' pin-ism“ than first-1th :‘Itttiiet‘tv.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

[Lit The national intelligence program allocates pa}.r and non-pay dollars to the SIUINT mission
through seven investment portfolios. .-"ts discussed below. the work of each must be tailored Jfor
success in a changing. world. Ultimately. desired customer outcomes demand certain operational
concepts and ﬁtnerions. These require sets of personnel and technical capabilities and supporting.
inFrastnIcture. all playing. the right role at the right time as scripted by system engineering.

[1.1.1.(5tittcstiaassttjlnsrarities

['I'S. . Sl.-".-"Rl:'L] Historically. we've arrayed independent accesses against various streatns ofpoint-
[ti-point coinmuuications. ﬁts we shil't li'orn intercepting links to exploiting networks though.
multiple collection plat Forms must he engineered and outﬁtted to work in concert- and alien in
real-time. ‘v'ast tptanlities of message esternals and other network metatlata must he harvested.

 

.I.

{Ll} Such business cases should take into account national priorities. geopolitical and technology itrrccasts.
mission assessttieiu data. and det‘ensible cost information.

 

oﬁen t'ia bulk "midpoint" collection ot‘ global backbones. ‘t-“endors attd sen’ice pro'riders mttst
also be leveraged to obtain metadata and other targeting and vulnerabilityr intonnation. as well as
tral‘ﬁc. “Endpoint” ope-rations mttst expand. to retrieve tnore targeted data directly attd to alter
routing or encryption For the beneﬁt of'passn'e sensors.

[Si'r'Slr'r'RElt h-‘lltlpoint collectors will still be used to acquire content {and notjust metadata}. but
with less success and at greater cost as trafﬁc irolumes and velocities rise. h-‘lohile and tactical
systems. cox-err and clandestine programs. and twerheart assets will continue to pertonn their
specialized tasks until the spread of network technology offers a better play. and will he
modernized as the mission requires or when automation or new technology can significantly
reduce long-term manpower or life-cycle support costs. Endpoint trtetltods will he used for more
ELll‘s'l' and HS tasks. gathering data on some weapons or emitters hellire they're deploy-ed.r

(l '] Processing and Exploitation

[R’s'Slr'r'l-{ELt ll‘collcetion operations around the globe are to work in tandctn in real-time. then
the processing and exploitation i'ahric ol‘tlte SlGlNT' system must ]JI'O\ ide for distributed storage
and robust messaging. Fast. llcxiltlc. Front-end processors tnust spot targets based on patterns.
erents. or tnctadata rather tltan pie-deﬁned selectors or brute. force scanning of content. High
perlionnance computing systems must extract meaning from huge data sets and to negate data
encryption and contputer access controls.

[Hu'r'Sls's'RELt New developments will stress standardized interfaces that let diverse applications
share infrastructure. and will later automation and otT—tlte-shel 1‘ technology ot'er manual
processes and point solutions. New SIGIKT system architectures will de-couple et-ettt detection
From follow-on reaction and processing. so that applications can he added or deleted with little
impact to ongoing operatiorts and so that sensors and processors can serre many tasks rather than
one opcr'atit'ntal slot-'cpipe. All this — and increased use ol‘ remotely- conﬁgurable commercial
hardware — will also cut the time needed to retool or refocus technical infrastructure as customer
needs. target hehariors or technical constraints change; they‘ll reduce life-cycle costs as well.

(L) Analysis and Production

[Sr'r'Sl-“r'RELt In the aﬁermath of the digital revolution. powerful analytics and empowered
analysts are how we discover targets and their secrets and how we harness our technical
capabilities to our customers’ missions. Athances itt collection and processing. must let us ﬂap
erents of interest as they happett. accumulate far more contest-rich metadata. and collate
targeted communications and transactions across accesses. To take adr-atttage of this. analysts
must hare new tasking. association. and presentation tools. and larger and more adaptable
storage and retrieval systems. Fomtnately. inf'onnation management and mining is central to the
Internet age and nest-generation analytics can employ many commercial products attd practices.

 

tS.-'.-'RE]_.t Looking forward. we will continue to devote more analysts to esploiting digital
network intelligence and to working problems related to cotutter-terrorism. counter-pro]iteration.
(.‘ltina. Iran. and the h-liddlc Fast. aggressively investing in the necessary tools and training. and
"Franchising" some mature missions to qualiﬁed partners. We will deemphasiee the traditional
concept of a SIGINT storefront (requirements inft'eporttng out] in tat-‘ot' of having tar more
analysts workng physically or tinually within the missions that they support. They will act
more as a consultancy than a simple data source. helpinp shape customer plans to relleel the “art

 

Halal-1701.0] Some cltmctertzzttion of actual emitters in real world opcmlion may sltll. howes‘cr. ht:
llkLCL‘5‘inr}

 

TOP SECRETHCOMINTHREL TO USA, FVEYHZO3201IJB

ofthe possible" and giving each customer's own analytic workforce the power and knowledge to
reap. rather thanjust consume. SIGIN'I‘.

-tlitMissing.ﬁ'lanaestnent

[l_.-'.-'Ft'}l_ltJ} To optimize ever more complex. last-moving. cross-access operations. we must
introduce intelligent agent technology that automatically updates tasking and status as it interacts
with technical inti‘astructm‘e. visualization tools. and authoritative databases. To prevent
strategic stir-pose. we must track geopolitical and technology trends to identity potential gaps and
mitigate them before mission performance degrades. To accommodate an increased fusion of
SIGINT analysis with customer activities. we must develop new mission management tools that
capture and handle a freer flow ofinteractious and new forms ofsupgntrt. 'l'o pave the way for
more meaningful productivity estimates and more enlightened investment decisions. we must
instrLunent collection. processing. and dissemination systems so that sources can he linked
through analysis to customer outcomes.

(1..) Research

[Sr‘r‘Slr'r'RELl Dur ability to master glohal networks and handle previoust tmimagined volumes
of raw data front both passive and active collection will depend in large part on successful
research. Requirements inclttde ever tnore powerful methods of knowledge discovery and
management- highly capable software implants and mobile agents. optimal distributed storage
arrangements. and advanced analytic algorithms. Underpinning all this must he high
productivity computing systems and world-leading cryptanalytic talent that cart both cope witlt
pervasive hard encryption and find and exploit meaning in large data sets generally. Researchers
must also break new ground in the area of enterprise security management if we‘re to fully
realize a more interconnected. distributed. and autonomous SIGN-"f operations fabric and
geographically dispersed analytic collaboration.

(U) Enterprise IT and Enterprise Management

[LL-“:“FDUD'; New operational strategies and capabilities can‘t deliver on their prontises without
the right military. civilian. and contractor workforce. t1 modernized enterprise information
technology infrastructure. and an assured 2|“ century physical plant. The quantity and quality of
language analysts. intelligence analysts. mathematicians. and computer network exploitation
specialists are priorities. as is rebuilding the acquisition. system engineering. and
business-"project management workforce. Another imperative is modernizing enterprise
networks. platforms. and services. this eftort ranges from bandwidth expansion. to server
consolidation and refresh. to introducing user tokens and other infonnalion assurance measures.
A third is dealing with long-tletcrred real property maintenance and the mitigation of long-
sitnineiing power. space. and cooling shortfalls.

TOP SECRETHCOMINTHREL T0 USA. FVEYHZDSZD‘EOB

 

(U) APPENDIX A: Assessing Overall Performance

 

t_L‘.-'.-"F(JU(_)t Customers request SIUINT by specrﬁ'ing the "essential elements of inthnnation"
[_EEls_l that they want to uncover. The National Intelligence Priorities Frarrren-orli ti‘ilPl") rrraps
each F.F.l into one of three bands (A, R. or C] ot‘ successrvelv decreasing concern according to
general topic. and assigns a l-r" priority based on the combination of the topic and speciﬁc
geopolitical or non-state entity involved. Responsive SIGINT is delivered in several t‘onrrs. but
serialized reporting dominates. and so one indicator of end-to-end mission performance is the
percentage ol‘ requested F.Fls for which at least some responsive reporting is provided tie. the
{Liz-1' titration t‘r'i‘tt'}.

fifth-"FOLIO; At a macro-level. the Overall citation rate for “Band  F.F.ls should he greater titan
that for "ﬂood B." which in turn should exceed that For “Band  Beyond that. performance
against each “Band 3‘." topic is also weighed in accordance with the following lit‘st-ot‘der' rules.
l‘ertbrmance is poor it"a “Band  topic's rare doesn't even exceed the overall "Band B" rate.
Pertbrmance is trust- it‘a topic's rate is above the overall “Band B" rate. but less than the overall
“Band  rate. Pert‘onnance islfor'r orgomr' it"a topic's rate is at or above the overall “Band .u't"
rate. with the latter also requiring that the rate for the topics “priority I" Elils be higher than that
for the topic's F.F.ls generally.

[Lit (-Allilllttl] rates reﬂect only the existence. ol‘responsive SIGINI", and not its impact. ilk-'lDI'CU‘v'CL
they don‘t directlyr account tor requests that are addressed entirely by other than serialized
reporting. and they can he skewed by careless recordl-ieeping or differences in granularity
between EEls. 'l'hcreﬁrre, quarterly citation rate assessments are. complemented with two
broader. more subiective. and Irrorc manpower intensive views of customer outcomes and
satisfaction.

[l.I.-'.-"F('tt.lt')} The ﬁrst is a iprartcrlv. manual assessment of performance against each Ml’li “Band
A" topic that includes niche interactions that don't involve Ii|:'1s as well as dcliverahles beyond
serialized reporting. PcrfonnauCe is graded on the extent to which records show that responsive
intiirmtrtion 1. ras pushed to or pulled by a customer. and sampling suggests that the records that
lie deliverables to requests are accurate. urnt‘ sampling suggests that the information delivered
Was germane vice just tangential. Performance is poor if responsiveness is well below average
[relative to that for "Band A" tasks as a whole). treml‘ it“ responsiveness is semen-hat below
ttvcrage._fiur ii'resptrnsiveness is average or better. and goon" if responsiveness overall is average
or better and is better still against high plioritiCs.

EL.'.-'.-"li'DL'D} The second is a quarterly survey ofroughlv 2t) intelligence consumers. speciﬁed h}.-
position based on their ability to speak httowledgahly," and authoritativer about the SlGll‘x'T
contributions to he}; cit il or military,- customers Those solicited represent the uniﬁed combatant
commands and the Joint Staff; the Departments of State- "treasury. Commerce. Energy. and
Homeland Security; the Central intelligence and Defense intelligence t-ltgeneies, the l-"ederal
Bureau of Investigation; the Drug Enforcement .-"tdrrrinistration; the National Courrterterr‘orisrrr
Center; the LLS- "trade Representative; and the. White [louse Situation Room.

 

TOP SECRETHCOMINTHREL TO USA, FVEYH203201 08

(U) APPENDIX B: IMMEDIATE IMPERATIVES

tS.-".-"RL‘L} Gain mare pert asire and persistent insight inlﬂ al-Qa'ida til-Qa‘ida afﬁliates.
Hezbollah. and other terrorist targets, despite their increasingly aggressive C'OMSEC'
practices.

t'S.-".-"REL] lnfillrate the most secret communications and data of the leadership. military.
and security bureaus oflran, North Korea. China, and similar targets al'high concept.

lth Betterdeﬁne and pursue immediate. near-term, and strategic mission management.

tLL-Z-‘FDUDJ Optimize SIGINT discovery to find and follow targets. reﬁne their
prosecution. and anticipate their shifts.

1th Identify and plan lhrgeepolitieal and technology trends.

t'U.-'.-'F(_}U(_)_J Introduce praduetized net-centric capabilities intn Inamsn'eam SIGINT
Operations (in a scale that preduces signiﬁcant dl‘i-‘ldBHdS in the eartntertetmliSm arena
and elsewhere.

TOP SECRETHCOMINTHREL T0 USA, FVEYHZDSZD‘IUB

 

